Chronic Pain and Opioid Use Disorder Studies
================================================================================

Total Studies Found: 482

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Role of hemopexin in the development of urologicchronic pelvic pain syndrome
Project Number: 1F31DK139684-01A1

Abstract:
PROJECT SUMMARY/ABSTRACT
Urologic chronic pelvic pain syndrome (UCPPS) is a condition characterized by persistent pelvic pain and lower
urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) and has an incompletely understood etiology. The symptomology of UCPPS is
often differentially attributed to the urinary bladder in females and the prostate in males. Two important factors
that have been associated with both the development of UCPPS and symptom flares in patients are chronic
stress and dysregulation of extracellular heme homeostasis. The objective of this application is to examine the
role of hemopexin (Hpx) in pelvic and visceral pain associated with UCPPS. Hpx is a glycoprotein with anti-
inflammatory effects due, in part, to scavenging of heme, a hemoglobin precursor located in red blood cells
(RBCs). Liberation of heme from damaged RBCs has previously been associated with stress exposure, and cell-
free heme has deleterious effects including production of reactive oxygen species and promotion of inflammation
and pain. AIM 1 will examine the relationship between chronic stress exposure, cell-free heme concentration,
and development of pelvic/bladder hypersensitivity in the context of Hpx depletion. AIM 2 will assess whether
chronic stress exposure alters nociceptive processing in spinal dorsal horn neurons in Hpx KO and WT mice.
AIM 3 will use small animal fMRI to compare brain activity before and after stress exposure in Hpx KO and WT
animals. Identification of a mechanistic role of Hpx and/or regulation of heme homeostasis in pain associated
with UCPPS will reveal a novel avenue for the therapeutic development. The proposed research will be
completed under the mentorship of Dr. DeBerry (Sponsor) and Dr. Bolding (Co-sponsor) and is one component
of the fellowship training plan that will enhance the applicant’s expertise in 1) biostatistics, 2) neuroimaging
analysis, 3) neuroimmunology in chronic pain, and 4) scientific writing and leadership skills. The proposed
research and training will be carried out at the University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB) Heersink School of
Medicine with support from the UAB Graduate School, Behavioral Neuroscience (BN) Doctoral Program, and
UAB Small Animal Imaging Shared Facility.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Dissection of NTSR2/calcium channel signaling as a non-opioid spinal analgesic mechanism for the treatment of high impact chronic pain
Project Number: 1R01NS139492-01A1

Abstract:
Project Summary:
Spinal administration of analgesics such as opioids and local anesthetics via an implanted intrathecal drug
delivery system have profound efficacy in some of the most severe high impact chronic pain conditions. Despite
their profound efficacy, their use is limited primarily because of side effects such as tolerance, psychosis and
motor block associated with drugs used in them (opioids, ziconotide, local anesthetics). Novel analgesics that
take advantage of spinal pain processing, are safe to use in humans and have minimal motor block and tolerance
can be revolutionary in the management of high impact chronic pain conditions.
Contulakin-G (CGX) is a snail venom derived peptide that has homology with mammalian neurotensin has been
shown to be safe in humans and in a small, pilot Phase1A study demonstrated analgesic effects in patients with
spinal cord injury pain, a high impact chronic pain condition. These studies suggested a possibility of a novel,
non-opioid, analgesic mechanism that is active in humans. Our preliminary studies in animal models of high
impact chronic pain unraveled spinal neurotensin receptor 2 (NTSR2) and subsequent inhibition of voltage-gated
calcium channels Cav2.3 and 2.2 as an opioid-independent spinal analgesic mechanism. Importantly, despite
profound analgesia, NTSR2 activation was not associated with unwarranted side effects such as rapid tolerance
or motor blockade.
Despite clear translational relevance of NTSR2-Cav2.3/2.2 pathway, nothing is known about NTSR2
downstream signaling that leads to calcium channel inhibition, particularly so in sensory neurons. Aim 1 will
evaluate detailed signaling following NTSR2 activation that leads to calcium channel inhibition in mouse sensory
neurons. Aim 2 will assess the anatomical correlation and functional significance of NTSR2-Cav pathway in
human sensory neurons and spinal cord. Aim 3 will evaluate in vivo significance of this pathway in models of
high impact chronic pain with rigorous independent replication.
If successful, proposed studies could unravel the signaling molecules involved in human-tested mechanism for
the treatment of high impact chronic pain conditions. Moreover, this information can be utilized for further
development of novel analgesics that are biased agonist of or directly engage this signaling pathway.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Differential impact of acute and chronic opioids on ocular innate immunity and infections
Project Number: 1R21EY037082-01

Abstract:
Project Summary
Opioid Use Disorder (OUD) poses serious consequences including overdose or death from excessive and
prolonged use of prescribed or illicit opioids. The opioid epidemic has also resulted in a striking, nationwide
increase in infectious diseases including HIV, hepatitis, and invasive bacterial and fungal infections, which
worsen long-term health outcomes. The consensus is that opioids are immunosuppressive and thereby
increase the vulnerability to infections. However, the effect of acute or repeated opioid exposure on immunity
remains elusive. In the eye, substance use is an important risk factor for developing endogenous
endophthalmitis, a blinding infectious disease primarily caused by fungal (Candida sp.) and bacterial (S.
aureus) pathogens. Several clinical and epidemiological studies have reported an increasing number of opioid
use-associated endophthalmitis cases. Our preliminary data showed that cultured human retinal pigment
epithelium (RPE) cells, human monocytes, and mouse retina express the mu-opioid receptor (MOR) which is
activated in response to morphine exposure. Acute morphine exposure increased, whereas repeated morphine
exposure decreased, inflammatory response in cultured cells. Similarly, repeated morphine administration in
B6 mice reduced cytokine levels in the plasma but elevated them in the retinal tissue. Additionally, systemic
Candida auris infection in morphine-dependent mice increased fungal burden in the eye, brain, and kidneys.
Based on these findings, we hypothesize that repeated opioid exposure (e.g., morphine and fentanyl) impairs
both systemic and ocular innate immunity resulting in increased incidence and severity of infectious
endophthalmitis. The overall goal of this proposal is to evaluate the effect of opioids on innate immunity and its
impact on the pathogenesis of endophthalmitis. Here, we will elucidate mechanisms underlying impaired innate
responses of retinal and myeloid cells under opioid exposure (Aim 1) and determine whether OUD increases
the susceptibility and severity of endophthalmitis in mouse models (Aim 2). The knowledge gained from this
study could have a significant impact on ocular infections among substance abusers and could contribute to
the advancement of therapeutic interventions in the field, offering new hope for preserving vision and improving
outcomes in patients affected by these conditions.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: In situ forming implant drug delivery for non-addictive post-operative analgesia
Project Number: 1R03EB037115-01

Abstract:
PROJECT SUMMARY
The opioid crisis in the United States resulted in over 100,000 overdose deaths in 2022. Reducing opioid
prescriptions, particularly for acute pain, is crucial for minimizing substance use disorders. However, current
alternatives for pain management are insufficient, leaving opioids as the predominant treatment strategy.
Currently, the longest-acting analgesia available lasts only 72 hours; however, patients may experience pain for
up to 168 hours following oral facial surgery. Therefore, extending analgesia beyond 72 hours is critical for
effective postoperative pain relief. The proposed in-situ forming implant (ISFI) offers the potential for local
anesthetic release, regional nerve blocks, and acute and chronic pain treatment. We will use a poly(beta-amino
ester) (PBAE) microparticle derived from poly(ethylene glycol) diacrylate (PEGDA) and hyaluronate acrylate
(HA), incorporated into a poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) system. This ISFI design will be gel-like prior to
complexation, and upon injection into an aqueous solution will form a solid. The PEGDA-HA microparticle will
be loaded with bupivacaine, ensuring all of the drug is in the inner layer of the polymer matrix, which is
hypothesized to reduce and potentially eliminate burst release, and rather yield a monophasic zero-order release
profile to ensure consistent drug release in the therapeutic window. Clinical oversight on this project is provided
by Dr. Gupta and materials design is provided by Dr. Givens and Dr. Hilt, who each have expertise in polymeric
drug delivery. The team has a history of successful collaboration and mentoring, ensuring effective research
execution. The research focuses on materials synthesis, characterization, and evaluation of bupivacaine release
profiles at different pH levels. Preliminary data indicate the feasibility of generating crosslinked acrylate systems
and ISFIs from these systems. The research objectives in this proposal are to achieve high bupivacaine loading
to minimize polymer volumes per injection and sustained release over a 168-hour therapeutic window. We will
also develop a biomimetic model to evaluate ISFI formation, degradation, and drug release in the orofacial
region. The successful completion of this project will provide novel information on PEGDA-HA systems for drug
delivery and the potential for ISFIs as long-term analgesic delivery for post-operative pain management.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Electrophysiological Dynamics of Acute Opioid Use in Human Reward, Affect, and Pain Pathways
Project Number: 1K01DA060327-01A1

Abstract:
ABSTRACT
Opioid use disorder (OUD) and chronic pain (CP) are interrelated, both impacting the brain's reward, affect, and
pain circuits. OUD is prevalent among CP patients, and the euphoric effects and negative reinforcement
properties of opioids are significant factors contributing to an increased risk of abuse in this population. The
neural circuitry of OUD has been extensively studied using animal models and human neuroimaging, and an
overall reduced functional connectivity within the reward network has been found among CP patients and those
with OUD. However, the dynamic changes in connectivity from acute opioid use, and how these differ for CP
patients who are at risk of developing OUD remain largely unknown.
To address this gap in knowledge, we aim to uncover how acute opioid use impacts neural connectivity by
directly recording human neuronal signals from regions associated with OUD. These regions encompass
interconnected and overlapping circuits involved in reward, affect, and pain processing, and include: amygdala,
hippocampus, insula, orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), medial and ventrolateral and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
(mPFC, VLPFC, DLPFC), anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), sensory thalamus, and periaqueductal gray matter
(PAG). To achieve this, we will leverage a unique ability to directly record local field potentials (LFP) from awake
humans, who have electrodes implanted for clinical purposes in deep brain regions, that opportunistically overlap
with areas implicated in OUD. These recordings will be obtained from two patient groups: 1) epilepsy patients
implanted with temporary brain electrodes for seizure monitoring (for 1-2 weeks), covering reward and affect
processing areas, and 2) deep brain stimulation (DBS) patients undergoing awake DBS placement surgery,
covering pain processing areas. Both groups routinely receive opioids to manage surgical pain, and both includes
a subset of patients who have chronic pain (CP). This enables us to compare neural activity during acute opioid
administration across individuals with varying degrees risk for developing OUD. In this project, patients will rate
their pain and mood levels on a scale (0-10) before and after receiving opioid pain medications, and the change
in reward/affect (Aim1) and pain (Aim2) network connectivity will be assessed, and further explored across
patients with varying degrees of risk in developing OUD (Aim3).
Through this K01 award, Dr. Ryu will lead the project and receive valuable mentored training by an
interdisciplinary team specializing in substance use disorder, neuromodulation, human brain signal processing,
and computational modeling. By the conclusion of the K01 award period, this research will reveal the
neurophysiological signatures within the addiction circuitry related to acute opioid use, offering valuable insights
for the development of future neuromodulatory treatments for OUD, and will further guide Dr. Ryu toward
achieving independence in this research field.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Pain management teams using Whole Health to optimize function and safety in veterans: The TEAMWORK trial
Project Number: 1UG3HX003997-01A1

Abstract:
The intersecting problems of high-impact chronic pain and the opioid overdose crisis continue to be major
public health concerns because of prevalence, costs, disparities, and societal burden, yet very few solutions to
support comorbid chronic pain, opioid dependence, and opioid-related harms are available. To address chronic
pain and ineffective and potentially unsafe opioid use, the 2016 Comprehensive Addiction and Recovery Act
(CARA) mandated that each VHA facility designate pain management teams (PMTs): interdisciplinary teams of
providers including, at a minimum, providers with expertise in pain medicine, addiction medicine, behavioral
medicine, and rehabilitation medicine. While interdisciplinary team-based care -- including access to addiction
medicine and multimodal pain care -- is recommended, there is limited evidence for specific PMT models.
More work is needed to understand how to best build and maintain effective PMTs equipped to care for
veterans with high-impact chronic pain – particularly those who also may be experiencing opioid-related harms.
 In 2012, our team developed a PMT similar to interdisciplinary PMTs evaluated in other trials, but with a
specific focus on mitigation of opioid-related harms, including the prescription of buprenorphine, first-line
therapy for opioid dependence. Our PMT uses a biopsychosocial approach to improve pain-related function
and opioid safety; recently, we used implementation facilitation to disseminate our approach to three other
VHA facilities. A promising enhancement we propose to test in the present study is the use of Whole Health
Coaches (WHCs) following the Whole Health Model. This model promotes a whole-person patient-centered
approach emphasizing multiple determinants of health including social and emotional health, with a broader
goal of overall well-being. WHCs may be a valuable addition to PMTs in building relationships with patients to
engage them in positive behavioral change. While WHCs are starting to be implemented in some PMTs, this
will be the first study to evaluate the impact of WHC for veterans with chronic pain and opioid dependence.
 In this proposal, “Pain management teams using Whole Health to optimize function and safety in veterans:
The TEAMWORK trial,” we aim to compare the effectiveness of treatment with a usual care PMT (PMT-UC) vs.
PMT treatment enhanced with Whole Health coaching (PMT-WHC) in a pragmatic effectiveness-
implementation hybrid type 2 trial. In the UG3 pre-implementation preparatory phase, we will use formative
evaluation to refine implementation materials, support four VHA facilities to prepare to participate as study
sites, and train WHCs. In the UH3 implementation phase, we will conduct a multisite pragmatic trial,
randomizing 432 patients, to compare PMT-UC vs. PMT-WHC on the primary composite outcome of pain-
related interference and opioid safety. We will also evaluate the impact of PMT-WHC on buprenorphine
initiation and maintenance, evaluate implementation facilitation strategies for building and sustaining PMTs,
and conduct a budget impact analysis.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Non-invasive vagal nerve stimulation as novel treatment to improve functionaloutcomes in Veterans with alcohol use disorder
Project Number: 1IK2RX004777-01A2

Abstract:
Alcohol use disorder (AUD) is a serious mental health disorder that affects more than 40% of US military
Veterans, presenting a major burden to this population and to the VA Healthcare System. Relapse rates of AUD
are extremely high; over half of Veterans who complete treatment relapse within 6 months, highlighting the need
for improved treatments or different treatment targets. Long-term excessive drinking results in homeostatic
dysregulation due to changes in the central and autonomic nervous system, which manifests in psychological
and physical distress during abstinence and results in the urge to drink to relieve these symptoms. These
symptoms, which can be equated to withdrawal, lead to continued harmful drinking and relapse, and are
associated with significant functional impairment and reduced quality of life.
Current AUD treatments do not effectively mitigate this homeostatic dysregulation and have risks and side effects
as well as other limitations. We propose the vagus nerve, which is the main nerve of the parasympathetic branch
of the autonomic nervous system and plays an important role in maintaining and restoring physiological
homeostasis, as a novel treatment target for AUD. Noninvasive stimulation of the vagus nerve (nVNS) has been
shown to alleviate anxiety, depression, and pain, and to reduce affective and physiological symptoms of opioid
withdrawal, which are highly overlapping with AUD. We hypothesize that nVNS can restore homeostasis and
reduce withdrawal-related distress and craving, and consequently improve functional outcomes and quality of
life in Veterans with AUD.
The applicant’s current work (CDA-1) demonstrates that nVNS as a rehabilitative treatment for AUD is feasible
and that non-invasive neuromodulation is well accepted by Veterans without any serious adverse effects. In
addition, CDA-1 data provides preliminary support that nVNS is effective in reducing withdrawal-related distress,
alcohol craving, and improving functional outcomes, and that nVNS can alter neural responses in brain regions
subserving perception of physical and psychological distress. The goal of this CDA-2 award is to build on this
feasibility data and to assess treatment efficacy and mechanism of action in a larger study sample. The proposed
study will include 80 Veterans with current AUD (with at least one functional disability due to alcohol use and
current alcohol craving based on DSM-5 criteria), who will be randomized to receive nVNS or sham stimulation
prior to performing a well-validated heat pain task designed to assess neural and physiological correlates of
distress. Subjects will then self-administer nVNS/sham at home twice a day for 7 days and return for a follow-up
visit, during which all study components will be repeated. Behavioral assessments of psychological and
physiological distress, craving, and functional outcomes will be administered at baseline and post-treatment, as
well as at a 1-month follow-up visit.
The proposed work has the potential to lead to an innovative, low-risk treatment option with high promise to
significantly improve the care and lives of Veterans as there is a need for non-medication, non-psychotherapy
options for AUD. nVNS is a low-risk, cost-effective form of neuromodulation that can be safely self-administered
at home (treatment application takes 2 minutes), and thus presents a low burden to the patient. As such, this
novel, neuromodulatory AUD treatment could be particularly beneficial for Veterans who do not tolerate
pharmacotherapy, and who have access or cognitive limitations or stigma concerns that act as barriers to
psychotherapy. The CDA-2 training plan is designed to guide the applicant’s development toward becoming an
independent productive clinical researcher within the VA Healthcare System with expertise in neuroscience-
based rehabilitation of AUD.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: The Role of Pain-Facilitating Circuits in Chronic Pain after Traumatic Brain Injury
Project Number: 1IK2BX006567-01

Abstract:
Traumatic brain injury (TBI), particularly mild TBI (mTBI, or “concussion”), is commonly associated with
chronic pain, such as headache and generalized body pain. It also leads to prolonged pain and worse
functional outcomes after subsequent injuries or surgeries, contributing to poor quality of life and opioid
misuse. Despite this well-known link between mTBI and pain, one of the major obstacles to developing
effective therapies specifically for mTBI-related pain is the critical knowledge gap concerning why patients
with mTBI develop chronic pain. Emerging clinical and laboratory studies suggest that the endogenous pain-
modulating system is disrupted after mTBI, impacting the interplay of pain-facilitating and pain-inhibiting
circuits. The objective of the proposed project is to delineate the neurophysiological processes through which
mTBI disrupts the endogenous pain-modulating circuits, thereby prolonging and intensifying pain.
 The best-studied pain-modulating circuit is the rostral ventromedial medulla (RVM), which exerts
bidirectional modulatory effects by facilitating or inhibiting the passage of noxious input from the periphery
through the dorsal horn. Activation of pain-facilitating neurons in the RVM, ON-cells, can increase pain
sensitivity by establishing a transient positive feedback loop for nociception in response to noxious stimuli.
However, sensitization of ON-cells and this pronociceptive loop has been implicated in several chronic pain
conditions. The overarching hypothesis of this project is that mTBI contributes to a persistent pain state by
sensitizing ON-cells after the initial head injury. This hypothesis will be tested through completion of two
Specific Aims. First, the functional role of ON-cells in mTBI-induced hypersensitivity to postsurgical pain (Aim
1a) and headache (Aim 1b) will be explored through the use of chemogenetic methods and transgenic mice to
selectively manipulate the ON-cell circuits. Second, the neurophysiology of ON-cells after mTBI (Aim 2a), and
the progressive changes in their activity over time in response to subsequent surgical pain (Aim 2b) and
environmental stresses (Aim 2c) will be studied using in vivo fiber photometry and calcium imaging. We expect
that the sensitization of ON-cells is the principal driver for mTBI-related pain behaviors, and chemoinhibition of
this pronociceptive circuit will attenuate both persistent postsurgical pain and headache after mTBI.
 There is now growing evidence that dysfunction of the brainstem pain modulation system is an important
factor in many clinically significant pain states. This project addresses a critical knowledge gap by defining the
circuits underlying the relationship between mTBI and chronic pain, and is unique for its functional delineations
of the plasticity in a major pain-modulating system as pain behaviors evolve over time after mTBI. Successful
completion of these studies will provide insights into functional changes in the pain-modulating system and
pain persistence after mTBI, and could facilitate our understanding of other centralized pain conditions, such
as Gulf War Illness. Identifying the central mechanistic targets underlying the sensitization of the endogenous
pain modulation system is thus a crucial step toward better treatments for Veterans with TBI.
 In addition to the scientific significance, the proposed research will allow the PI, Dr. Chen, to become an
expert in three technical domains critical to his long-term career goal at the VA: 1) the use of clinically relevant
behavioral models for central pain syndromes; 2) the mastery of cutting-edge neuroscience tools, including
chemogenetic techniques and fiber photometry; 3) the application of genetic tools to neurophysiology and
circuit-focused pain research. The synergistic training and mentorship plans embedded in this CDA2
application will prepare Dr. Chen to obtain VA Merit Review and NIH funding by the time of project
completion. With this CDA2 program, Dr. Chen is poised to become an independent VA investigator focusing
on the functional contributions of endogenous pain modulation and other alterations of the CNS to clinically
significant pain conditions and advancing Veteran healthcare as a pain management specialist.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: CSRD Research Career Scientist Award Application
Project Number: 1IK6CX002926-01

Abstract:
Dr. Strigo runs a cross-disciplinary program that bridges pain physiology, psychopathology, psychological and
brain trauma and neuroscience. Her overall program aims to understand individual differences in pain
processing and its relation to chronic pain, psychiatric disorders, and opioid addiction. By experimentally
perturbing physiological, emotional, and brain responses to pain, Dr. Strigo uncovers alterations in pain
processing in individuals with depressive and trauma disorders and traumatic brain injuries. This innovative
approach addresses the complexity of pain and comorbidities in Veterans, leading to the development of
unique neurobehavioral biomarkers for tailored non-opioid interventions. Ultimately, seeking to improve pain
therapies and outcomes for all Veterans. Dr. Strigo was the first to identify and show differences in
interoceptive processing in major depression. She is known for the term “emotional allodynia” -- a qualitatively
altered negative emotional response to normally non-aversive stimuli or pain affect without pain sensation. Dr.
Strigo also pioneered research on changes in brain response to pain in post-traumatic stress disorder through
avoidant mechanism and in traumatic brain injuries through aberrant endogenous pain modulation. Her current
CS R&D funded work aims to identify specific neural mechanisms for pain-PTSD co-morbidity, ultimately
leading to novel, evidence-based therapeutic approaches, thereby reducing suffering and morbidity and
decreasing treatment costs. Dr. Strigo’s aims to translate her research discoveries into effective and
personalized pain management for Veterans living with pain, a high priority for the VA and VA primary care
providers. Her current, CS R&D-funded randomized controlled trial will provide another non-opioid therapy
available to Veterans with chronic pain by showing efficacy of weighted Blankets (WB) on pain and sleep
symptoms in Veterans suffering from chronic pain. The proposed research findings will provide critical
evidence for effects on pain and sleep disturbance for this novel, accessible and fully remote intervention.
Furthermore, Dr. Strigo established and provides research infrastructure for the Intensive Pain Rehabilitation
Program at SFVA. This endeavor resulted in cross-VA collaboration with five similar pain rehabilitation
programs across four different VAs across the country. Additionally, her research in pain management and
rehabilitation focuses on identifying unique clusters and phenotypes within chronic pain and predicting
treatment response, as well as factors driving opioid use/misuse in Veterans with chronic pain. This innovative
work using machine learning has begun to identify robust subgroups of patients and determine unique features
that predict their treatment trajectories. This will enable the assignment of individuals to the most effective
treatment options, promoting precision pain rehabilitation for Veterans with chronic pain, and improving their
overall well-being and functioning. This work is pivotal in understanding the effects of intensive pain
rehabilitation programs on Veterans and non-Veterans with chronic pain.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Amelioration of opioid use disorder with heterodyned whole body vibration
Project Number: 1R42DA060644-01

Abstract:
PROJECT SUMMARY/ABSTRACT
Opioid use disorder (OUD) is a rising problem, not only in the United States, but across the globe, with pain
and stress being a major factor for initial drug seeking and relapse. Over the past decade, OUD has reached
epidemic proportions, in part due to inappropriate use of prescription opioid pain killers. The mesolimbic
dopamine (DA) system originating in the midbrain ventral tegmental area (VTA) and projecting to the nucleus
accumbens (NAc) in the striatum is an important nexus for the rewarding properties of opioids and other
addictive drugs and is strongly implicated in OUD. The current FDA-approved treatments for OUD include
pharmacological and various types of counseling and behavioral therapies. As many consider pharmacological
treatments to be woefully inadequate, the public is in desperate need of more efficacious treatments for OUD.
Only two devices are currently FDA approved to treat OUD, which has prompted NIDA to issue a parent
announcement, RFA-DA-24-038, to develop device technologies to curb the opioid epidemic. This proposal
aligns with this initiative to further the development of a novel, non-pharmacological whole body vibration (WBV)
device to treat anxiety/craving and opioid use associated OUD. We have reported that selective activation of
specific spinal mechanoreceptors (MRs) for 1-2 min at a frequency of 45-80 Hz inhibits the activity of VTA
GABA neurons, enhances the activity of DA neurons, and subsequently increases DA release in the NAc via
endogenous opioids and delta ORs (DORs) in the NAc for hours. We have recently reported that WBV in
rodents, at the same frequencies that are optimal for cervical spine mechanoreceptor activation, ameliorates
neuronal, neurochemical, and behavioral effects of alcohol dependence, including anxiety, and we will show
preliminary evidence that WBV ameliorates the same measures in opioid dependence in rodents. Additionally,
we present preliminary evidence that our novel technology, termed heterodyned WBV (HWBV), at the same
frequencies informed by rodent students reduces generalized anxiety and, in a prior NIH-sponsored Phase I
study, anxiety associated with OUD. The objective of this proposal is to evaluate the translational
relevancy of these pre-clinical and clinical findings to treat OUD with a de novo device along the FDA
clearance pathway. We propose three Specific Aims in Phase I (Yr 1) that involve: 1) improvement of technical
aspects of the device, evaluation of physiological indices of anxiety, implementation of telemetry to control and
record from the device; 2) evaluation blood catecholamines and leukocyte DA D2 receptors (D2Rs) in drug-
free student volunteers following acute and chronic anxiety and creation of a normative database; and 3)
engagement with the FDA for creation of a commercial prototype for de novo device clearance. We propose
two Specific Aims in Phase II (Yrs 2-4) that involve: 1) evaluation of the effects of HWBV vs sham treatment in
160 male and female OUD subjects in a pivotal FDA-relevant clinical trial for de novo device clearance and
commercialization of technology; and 2) evaluation of blood catecholamine levels and leukocyte D2 receptors
as biomarkers for brain DA and as an objective index of treatment efficacy; and a 3) commercialization Plan
for HWBV technology. PhotoPharmics, Inc in collaboration with investigators and research associates at
Noorda College of Osteopathic Medicine and consultants/co-inventors, propose systematic studies to provide
proof-of-principle that HWBV is effective in treating anxiety/craving and opioid usage in subjects with OUD. The
studies proposed have as their endpoint an effective, non-invasive, non-pharmacological FDA-cleared device
to treat OUD.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Counteracting cardiorespiratory and subjective effects of fentanyl-xylazine mixtures using a dual antagonist approach
Project Number: 1R21DA062164-01

Abstract:
PROJECT SUMMARY
Since the mid-2010s, the US has experienced a sharp rise in drug overdose fatalities driven by the emergence
of the ultra-potent synthetic opioid fentanyl within the illicit drug supply. Recently, evidence derived from drug
seizures, epidemiological surveys, and clinical case reports show that fentanyl is being increasingly adulterated
with xylazine, an alpha-2 adrenergic receptor agonist approved for veterinary use as a sedative and analgesic.
According to anecdotal reports, xylazine is a desirable adulterant because it prolongs the otherwise brief
euphoria produced by fentanyl. However, fentanyl-xylazine mixtures have also been associated with severe
health risks as compared to fentanyl alone, including potentiated drug-induced hypoxia and enhanced resistance
to the opioid receptor antagonist naloxone. Collectively, these interactive effects likely contribute to the greater
overall risk for irreversible overdose and lethality recently observed in preclinical studies and clinical case reports.
This has led the US Government to designate fentanyl-xylazine mixtures as a “highly toxic chemical of concern”
and an “emerging threat” requiring rapid response. Alpha-2 receptor activation reduces central norepinephrine
levels, resulting in a physiological toxidrome resembling opioid exposure that includes respiratory depression,
bradycardia, and hypotension. However, the precise impact of fentanyl-xylazine mixtures on cardiorespiratory
function has not been examined, leaving unresolved the specific manner by which lethality might be prevented
in an emergency medical setting. Furthermore, xylazine-induced potentiation of fentanyl’s subjective effects has
not yet been evaluated in animal models, and thus the pharmacological mechanisms underlying this interactive
effect remain poorly understood. In this proposal, we will test the hypothesis that xylazine enhances both the
cardiorespiratory-depressant and subjective effects of fentanyl, and that dual antagonism of opioid receptors and
alpha-2 adrenergic receptors prevents the effects of combined fentanyl-xylazine exposure on these measures in
rats. In Aim 1, we will use telemetry and plethysmography to comprehensively characterize xylazine’s impacts
on fentanyl-induced changes in heart rate, blood pressure, core temperature, and respiration. In Aim 2, we will
determine whether xylazine intensifies and/or prolongs the interoceptive-stimulus effects of fentanyl using drug
discrimination procedures. Finally, in both Aims, we will test whether the effects of fentanyl-xylazine mixtures are
fully antagonized by co-administration of naloxone and the highly-selective alpha-2 receptor antagonist
atipamezole, an FDA-approved veterinary medication that safely and effectively reverses the sedative and
cardiorespiratory-depressant effects of alpha-2 receptors agonists in humans. If successful, these studies will
identify the receptor targets that mediate both the desirable and harmful effects of fentanyl-xylazine mixtures,
paving the way for the rapid development of effective overdose rescue medications and much-needed treatments
for fentanyl-xylazine misuse, potentially saving thousands of lives.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Novel Cyclic Peptide Analgesics for Intranasal delivery
Project Number: 1R15DA061114-01

Abstract:
PROJECT SUMMARY
 Pain is a major global health problem, causing a significant economic and social burden. Most clinically used
opioid drugs are -opioid receptor (MOR) agonists with liabilities of tolerance, physical dependence and addiction
mediated by this receptor. Centrally acting kappa-opioid receptor (KOR) agonists also inhibit pain, but without
abuse potential and without the adverse side effects associated with MOR agonists. Antidepressants that target
neurotransmitters serotonin and norepinephrine relieve pain in patients with chronic neuropathic pain
syndromes. However, KOR agonists and antidepressants are not perfect. KOR agonists developed to date
exhibit undesirable dysphoria and aversion, while antidepressants have not been successful in all pain
conditions. Thereby, there is a large unmet need for innovative therapies for pain management. The overall goal
of the proposed research is to develop novel peptide analgesics, for use along the entire continuum of care, as
an alternative to the existing treatment options for acute and chronic pain.
 Peptides have long been recognized for their roles in the normal function of the central nervous system (CNS),
making them particularly attractive candidates for the discovery and development of novel pain medications.
Conventional methods of drug administration such as oral or intravenous are inefficient in delivering peptides to
the brain. Both the blood-brain barrier (BBB) and blood-cerebrospinal fluid barrier (BCB) restrict the transport of
these therapeutic agents from blood into the CNS. Alternatively, intranasal (i.n.) delivery may be a route of
administration that would allow therapeutic peptides to bypass the BBB and BCB and directly enter the brain.
 To address the need for novel therapeutics to treat acute and chronic pain syndromes, we designed new
cyclic peptide-based analgesics suitable for i.n. delivery that combine selective KOR agonist and antidepressant
pain reliving mechanisms. Combining KOR agonist activity with simultaneous delivery of norepinephrine and/or
serotonin may improve pain management when more than one physiological mechanism or system is implicated
and may potentially minimize side effects associated with the KOR activation. The proposed cyclic peptides
represent a new class of analgesics structurally distinct from the commonly prescribed pain medications. To
further validate our approach for the design of novel cyclic peptide-based analgesics we propose to: (a) further
improve the analgesic properties of the OL-based cyclic peptides and minimize or eliminate undesired side
effects by modifying amino acid sequences using rational synthetic approach based on our previous studies
(Aim 1), (b) assess metabolic stability and nose-to-brain transit of selected peptides in mice (Aim 2); (c) assess
the therapeutic potentials of selected peptides in well-established pain rodent models and identify lead OL-based
cyclic peptides (2 peptides) with improved analgesic activity and reduced or complete absence of abuse ability
and side effects for further development (Aim 3).

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Neurobehavioral Impacts of Medical Cannabis Use: An Observational Study
Project Number: 1R01DA059961-01A1

Abstract:
Project Summary
This R01 proposal is submitted in response to NOT-DA-22-003, Public Health Research on Cannabis. The
overarching aim is to assess cognition, neural function, and SUD risk in a sample of patients treated with medical
cannabis products in Minnesota (n=120) as compared to non-cannabis using controls (n=60) and to differentiate
outcomes based on prescribed doses and blood concentrations of THC versus CBD as an objective measure of
drug exposure. Patients will be aged 35-65 and qualified for medicinal cannabis treatment in Minnesota due to
diagnoses of chronic pain. While deficits in learning, memory and executive functions are reliably observed in
young adult recreational cannabis users, it is unclear whether similar impairments characterize individuals who
use cannabis for medical reasons, whether adults may be uniquely vulnerable to cannabis-related impairments
or if, in fact, use in this age group might be neuroprotective. There are very few published studies of medical
cannabis users that comprehensively focus on neurobehavioral outcomes even though at least 5 million people
are registered for medical cannabis treatment in the United States. The current study will address this gap
through a pre-post assessment of users as compared to matched controls (pain patients who do not use
cannabis). Participants will be recruited through posted advertisements and through dispensaries via a
collaboration with the primary local supplier of medical cannabis. They will complete a comprehensive pre-
treatment behavioral assessment as well as multimodal MRI assessments. Sequences from the HCP-Aging
battery will be utilized. All measures will be repeated after four months of treatment. Participants will be
interviewed monthly by phone in the interval between visits. Behavioral outcomes, including substance misuse,
will be measured. Blood cannabinoid levels will be quantified and correlated with behavioral and neural
outcomes. Our three aims are (1) To assess impacts of medical cannabis compounds on cognition and behavior
in otherwise cannabis-naive adults to determine whether impairments that characterize younger users are
evident after the onset of medical cannabis use; we will also measure treatment-related changes in pain using
well-validated measures. (2) To similarly assess the impacts of medical cannabis compounds on white matter
microstructure, functional brain activity and functional connectivity using diffusion-weighted scans, task-based
fMRI, and measures of resting state connectivity; (3) To differential change over time in these outcomes as a
function of (a) exposure to distinct cannabinoids (THC vs. CBD) as assessed through blood concentrations and
(b) age. Sex as a biological variable will be assessed as a covariate of interest. Thus, this proposal will yield a
rich dataset through which medical cannabis effects on adults’ neurobehavioral function can be assessed and
contrasted with the literature on non-medical users.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Development of SBS-226, a MOR agonist / DOR antagonist, for OUD
Project Number: 1UG3DA059278-01A1

Abstract:
ABSTRACT
 Opioid use disorder (OUD) is a chronic disorder characterized by the repeated,
compulsive use of opioid drugs with a detrimental impact to one’s physical, social, and
psychological wellbeing. The use of prescription opiates is often necessary to control moderate
to severe levels of pain. However, about 10% of patients prescribed an opiate for a medical
condition are at risk for developing OUD. Opiate Use Disorder is a global problem but is at crisis
levels in the U.S with significant mortality. It is estimated in this country that about ~11M misuse
opioids, ~5.6M people have OUD and close to 80K died from opioid related overdoses. Sadly, the
COVID epidemic has worsened the epidemic by increasing risk factors for OUD and occurred at
a time when fentanyl has flooded the supply. Current treatments are primarily buprenorphine and
methadone. Despite treatment options, OUD is difficult to effectively treat long-term due to
access, stigma, and efficacy of the compounds.
 Mitragyna speciosa, a plant commonly known as kratom, has anecdotally been used for
treatment of opiate withdrawal and OUD. The naturally occurring active substance is believed to
be mitragynine and the 7- OH mitragynine (7OH) metabolite which act through the mu opioid
receptor. An active metabolite of mitragynine, 7OH mitragynine, demonstrates MOR agonist
properties such as analgesia, tolerance, physical dependence, and reinforcing effects. In contrast,
an analog of mitragynine named 9-methoxy corynantheidine pseudoindoxyl (9CP) has a very
different receptor binding profile and in vivo properties. 9CP is an partial agonist at MOR and it is
also a delta opioid receptor (DOR) antagonist. Unlike the natural products found in kratom, when
studied in mice under acute dosing 9CP is non-addictive, and demonstrates far less respiratory
depression, tolerance, and signs of physical dependence than morphine. Most importantly, in
mice, 9CP can ameliorate naloxone-precipitated withdrawal in morphine-dependent mice.
 Sparian has created a series of 9CP analogs and screened them across CMC, ADME,
and PK properties and identified a lead candidate – SBS-226. Therefore, as an innovative
pharmacological approach, we propose the development of SBS-226 as a novel selective, potent
and non-addictive chemical entity utilizing mixed MOR agonism/DOR antagonism for the
treatment of OUD. In the present application, we propose a full IND-enabling development plan
and Phase 1 clinical trial.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Establishing Oprm1 exon 7-associated variants as novel therapeutic targets for mitigating adverse effects of clinically used mu opioids without altering analgesia in pain management
Project Number: 1R01DA060222-01A1

Abstract:
Project Summary/Abstract
Mu opioids, such as fentanyl and oxycodone, remain in the mainstream for moderate-to-severe pain
management. However, they also produce many side-effects, leading to the development of opioid use disorder,
a main cause of the opioid epidemic and climbing opioid overdose death. The actions of mu opioids are primarily
mediated through the mu opioid receptors encoded by the single-copy mu opioid receptor gene, OPRM1, that
undergoes extensive alternative splicing, creating multiple splice variants. One set of OPRM1 variants, exon 7-
associated full-length 7TM C-terminal variants (E7 variants), contain a unique intracellular C-terminal tail
sequence with 30 amino acids encoded by E7 that are abundant and highly conserved from rodents to humans.
Culminative evidence has indicated that E7 variants contribute to several mu opioid-induced adverse side-effects.
First, truncating E7-enocded C-terminal tails in mice (mE7M-B6) attenuated mu opioid-induced tolerance, reward,
and respiratory depression without effect on analgesia. Second, similarities and dissimilarities in several
phenotypes between mE7M-B6 and β-arrestin2-KO mice suggest that E7 variants involve β-arrestin2-dependent
and β-arrestin2-independent mechanisms. Third, a mouse model in which only a single E7 variant, mMOR-1O,
is expressed (mMOR-1O-KI) showed enhanced morphine tolerance and reward, complementing those from
mE7M-B6 mice. Finally, a vivo-morpholino antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) and a newly developed rabbit
monoclonal antibody (RabmAb) targeting E7 variants diminished morphine tolerance and reward in mice.
Together, these observations strongly support our central hypothesis that Oprm1 E7 variants mediate several
adverse effects associated with clinically used mu opioids, such as tolerance, reward, and respiratory depression,
and targeting E7 variants can diminish these adverse effects but maintain mu opioid analgesic potency via other
Oprm1 7TM variants. These observations also provide compelling rationales for further investigating the role of
Oprm1 E7 variants in various actions of mu opioids using ASOs and antibodies as proposed in this application
with four independent, but integrated specific aims. Aim 1 is to characterize ASOs and RabmAbs that target
mouse Oprm1 E7 variants in both in vitro cell models and in vivo C57BL/6J (B6) mice, providing the necessary
information for designing experiments in Aims 2 & 3. Aims 2 & 3 are to investigate the effects of the selected
ASO and RabmAb on mu opioid-induced tolerance, reward, addiction, and respiratory depression in B6 mice
under naive (Aim 2) and chronic pain conditions (Aim 3), respectively. Aim 4 is to develop and characterize a
nanobody or an ASO targeting human/monkey exon O (E7 homolog) sequences and investigate the effects of
the nanobody or ASO on mu opioid abuse potential in rhesus monkeys. The proposed studies promise to yield
significant findings in establishing the E7 variants as therapeutic targets and provide the groundwork for
developing a therapeutic medication that combines clinically used mu opioids with an inhibitor (nanobody or ASO)
to mitigate the adverse effects of mu opioids in pain management.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Mechanisms of Mindfulness Meditation and Self-Hypnosis for Pain in Older Adults with Chronic Pain
Project Number: 1R01AG079832-01A1

Abstract:
Abstract
Chronic pain is common and often inadequately treated in older individuals. Although opioids are often used to
treat chronic pain, their use in older adults is associated with increased rates of falls, fractures, and mortality.
Advancing our understanding of non-pharmacological chronic pain treatment in Americans ≥60 years of age
will substantially alleviate the burdens caused by this condition. Experimental pain paradigms mimic the
experience of clinical pain (both neuropathic via thermal paradigms, as well as musculoskeletal via mechanical
paradigms) and provide a rigorously controlled approach to advancing the understanding of pain treatments.
Two efficacious, non-pharmacological chronic pain treatments are mindfulness meditation (MM) and self-
hypnosis (HYP). Prior research using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) has shown MM and HYP
may target changes in both unique and shared central pain mechanisms. However, it is not yet known whether
these same neuromodulatory changes underlie treatment-related reductions in chronic pain in older persons.
Given that aging affects the prefrontal cortex and both MM and HYP effectively target this region, these
interventions may be particularly well suited to enhance descending inhibitory pain control in older adults via
prefrontal cortical mechanisms. There is also a critical lack of research examining patient characteristics that
moderate treatment outcome. Our preliminary research using electroencephalography (EEG) has identified
pre-treatment brain-state variables that may predict who benefits most from MM and HYP. To identify the
neuromodulatory mechanisms of MM and HYP for chronic pain in older individuals, the proposed study will
include formal statistical tests of both mediation and moderation in a fully-powered clinical trial with N = 375
older adults with chronic pain (enrolled). The design will employ a 3-arm (MM, HYP, attention control) trial,
resulting in tightly controlled tests of treatment mechanisms to accomplish the study aims. Treatment will
consist of four, 20-minute sessions delivered over four consecutive days. The primary outcome will be change
in chronic pain intensity from pre- to post-training. Aim 1 will use perfusion-based arterial spin labelling fMRI to
determine the neuromodulatory mediators of treatment-related chronic pain intensity reductions, relative to the
control. Aim 2 will identify pre-treatment psychological and EEG-assessed moderators of reduced chronic pain
intensity in response to MM and HYP, relative to the control condition. The knowledge gained from adequately
powered, formal tests of mediation will provide an empirical basis for developing more efficacious pain
interventions that may also have a preventative-medicine role in older adults, thereby reducing the public
health burden incurred with chronic pain in this population. Elucidating the moderators of MM and HYP will
inform precision medicine and will also optimize the cost-effectiveness of chronic pain treatments.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Development and preliminary testing of a peer narrative video intervention for older adults with chronic pain
Project Number: 1R01AG089083-01

Abstract:
Chronic musculoskeletal (MSK) pain, which includes spinal pain, osteoarthritis, and fibromyalgia, is a common
and costly problem for older adults and is associated with decreased quality of life. There is a clear need for
interventions that increase one’s ability to cope with chronic pain and engage in meaningful life activities even
with the presence of chronic pain. Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (ACT) is a psychotherapy that uses
mindfulness and psychological acceptance to support individuals in working toward behavioral goals guided by
their personal values, even in the presence of undesirable experiences such as chronic pain. Clinical practice
guidelines recommend the use of ACT for treating chronic pain based on evidence of effectiveness from
multiple RCTs. However, uptake and reach are limited because there are insufficient numbers of mental health
professionals who currently offer ACT or other recommended therapies (e.g., cognitive-behavioral therapy) for
chronic pain. In addition, many older adults are not willing or able to engage in traditional psychotherapy for
chronic pain even when it is available. Although some bibliotherapy and digital health interventions (e.g., apps)
have been developed for treating pain, many older adults fail to use them due to low levels of comfort with
technology or lack of motivation for intensive self-guided approaches. Narrative communication is an
alternative way to deliver behavior change principles that involves “storytelling” involving real patients talking
about their struggles and recovery progress. Therapeutic narratives delivered via videos may be more
engaging and immersive than traditional self-help formats for older adults. In previous grant-funded research,
our team has developed methods for creating narrative, video-based interventions designed to reduce
depression in primary care patients and prevent suicide in patients following a psychiatric hospital. Thus, in this
project, we propose to create Reclaim Your Day (RYD), which will consist of 6, 30-min weekly video episodes
highlighting patients’ inspiring and illustrative experiences living with chronic pain in order to teach current
patients with chronic MSK pain how to apply ACT’s evidence-based strategies. In Phase 1 of this project, we
will interview older adults with chronic MSK pain about their coping history, and code interviews for consistency
with ACT principles. We will invite a subset of these individuals to work with a professional storytelling coach to
develop and videorecord their ACT-consistent stories. These documentary-style videos that will form the basis
of RYD. In Phase 2, we will conduct a pilot RCT (n=100) of older adults with chronic MSK pain. All participants
will receive a 30-min introductory pain education video. Participants will be randomized to receive either RYD
or a comparison intervention (health education videos). We will examine RYD feasibility and acceptability as
well as changes over time in outcomes (pain interference, depression, quality of life) and putative mediators.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Effects of Pain on Laboratory Drinking Topography and Daily Drinking in People with Chronic TMD Pain
Project Number: 1R01AA031815-01

Abstract:
Project Summary
Chronic Temporomandibular Disorder (TMD) is associated debilitating pain and dysfunction of the muscles of
the jaw, the temporomandibular joints, and related structures. TMD pain is highly prevalent, impacting ~5-12%
of the general population and over 20% of individuals seeking treatment for alcohol use disorder. Moreover,
treatments for chronic pain conditions like TMD, such as opioid analgesics, are relatively ineffective, rarely
meet patients’ own criteria for successful treatment, and are associated with significant risk. Therefore, many
patients seek alternative, maladaptive methods for pain relief, including self-medication with alcohol. Twenty-
five percent of treatment seeking people with alcohol use disorder (AUD) report past-month pain, and 25% of
chronic pain patients report heavy drinking. However, the effects of pain on alcohol consumption behavior in
heavy drinkers with chronic TMD pain are poorly understood. Despite the need for empirical investigations of
the effect of pain on naturalistic drinking behavior, previous work has not directly addressed this question. We
address this gap in knowledge by assessing the effect of pain on the microstructure of individual drinking
bouts, known as drinking topography (DT). The primary objective of this study is to determine the impact of
pain on DT in community-dwelling heavy drinkers with and without chronic TMD pain both in the laboratory and
in daily life using ecological momentary assessment (EMA). In the laboratory, we will use the Integrated
Topography and Consumption Tracking in Virtual Reality (INTACT VR) platform to provide a highly-controlled
drinking environment, increasing study rigor and reproducibility. In contrast, EMA provides high ecological
validity and the ability to ascertain whether pain-related DT patterns in the laboratory are also observed in the
real world. Importantly, our approach is informed by the Catastrophizing, Anxiety, Negative Urgency, and
Expectancy (CANUE) model, a theoretical moderated-mediation model regarding modifiable psychosocial
factors underlying pain as an antecedent for substance use. The results of this study will provide mechanistic
information regarding the effect of pain on alcohol consumption in heavy drinking individuals with chronic TMD
pain, as well as actionable information regarding modifiable and non-modifiable risk factors for potentially
hazardous alcohol use associated with pain self-management. This knowledge will facilitate optimization of
interventions to reduce alcohol-related consequences in people with chronic TMD pain. Such interventions can
potentially also have indirect benefits on chronic pain given evidence that hangover and alcohol withdrawal are
associated with increased pain severity.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Exploring the unknown function of LRRC55 in pain
Project Number: 1R21NS136065-01

Abstract:
SUMMARY
The opioid pandemic highlights the urgent needs to understand pain mechanisms and identify novel,
non-opioid therapeutic targets to treat pain. Ion channels involve in almost all aspects of pain sensation.
Therefore, targeting ion channels has been considered as one of the most promising strategies to replace
opioid analgesics for pain treatment. However, most of ion channels are widely expressed in the nervous
system. Thus, how to specifically target ion channels in pain transmission pathway without affecting their
other critical functions becomes a bottleneck in translating this strategy into clinical applications.
Interestingly, the activities of many ion channels are controlled by their cell-type specific regulatory
proteins. Targeting these regulatory proteins to control ion channels in pain pathways thus presents a
novel and highly specific approach to prevent ion channels-mediated pain with minimal to no side effects.
Our preliminary results showed that Lrrc55, an understudied regulatory subunit of BK potassium channel,
is expressed in a subset of dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons and spinal cord lamina i-ii neurons. Our
preliminary data also demonstrated that knockout of Lrrc55 abolishes mechanical pain without affecting
thermal heat pain in an inflammatory pain model and a nerve injury pain model. Our findings suggest that
LRRC55 might be a novel candidate target for treating pain, possibly selective for mechanical pain. In
this high-risk, high-reward application, two investigators will bring complementary and unique expertise
in ion channel biology and pain to: 1) delineate LRRC55’s roles in chronic pain behaviors using the Lrrc55
deficient mice; 2) quantify functional changes of Lrrc55 expression in DRG and spinal cord neurons after
chronic pain; and 3) test if knockdown of Lrrc55 in DRG and spinal cord neurons can be an effective
strategy to suppress chronic pain. Our study will be the first to demonstrate LRRC55’s neurological
function in pain. More importantly, success of this project can open a new avenue to develop novel and
specific therapeutics to target cell-type specific ion channel regulatory proteins to replace opioid-based
pain killers.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: IMPETUS: Integrated Mechanisms, Phenotypes, and Translational Underpinnings of Chronic Pain after Surgery
Project Number: 1RM1NS135283-01A1

Abstract:
Chronic postsurgical pain (CPSP) is a major healthcare burden, affecting nearly 20% of patients undergoing major surgery. CPSP is associated with diminished quality of life, mood disturbances, functional impairment, and increases the risk of opioid use disorder. Considerable research suggests that a combination of somatosensory, immune, affective and cognitive mechanisms contribute to CPSP, and that CPSP phenotypes are highly heterogeneous, even after identical surgical procedures. However, most prior research has explored peripheral or central mechanisms in isolation, preventing an integrated insight into underlying biological factors that drive these distinct clinical phenotypes. Preclinical models of CSPS have also failed to capture this phenotypic heterogeneity or meaningful clinical outcome measures, significantly limiting forward translation of basic discoveries. As a result, current strategies for predicting, preventing and treating CPSP are extremely limited. To address this need, we have developed the IMPETUS program that draws expertise from pain neurobiology, clinical pain research, clinical psychology, cognitive neuroscience, immunology, proteomics, genomics, transcriptomics, bioinformatics, machine learning, and pain medicine. Our goal is to gain integrated mechanistic insights into peripheral and central biological processes that contribute to CPSP, and to understand how these processes contribute to CPSP heterogeneity. Aim 1. Characterize peripheral neural and immune mechanisms contributing to CPSP. In patients with CPSP subsequent to abdominal or genitourinary surgery (n=220) and contemporaneous controls (n=100), we will characterize somatosensory profiles of mechanical and thermal sensitivity, the neural and immune milieu at the cutaneous site of injury, and circulating immune host profiles, and compare them with correlates across the same domains in a mouse model of laparotomy. Aim 2. Characterize cognitive and affective mechanisms contributing to CPSP. In patients with CPSP and controls, we will use granular longitudinal data collection methods to characterize affective, cognitive, and activity/sleep measures of CPSP, and compare them with animal model correlates across these domains, using translational outputs of amotivation, punishment-sensitivity, reversal learning task, and actigraphy. Aim 3. Identify and back-translate mechanism-based CPSP phenotypes. Using state-of-the-art machine learning approaches applied to multidimensional data generated in Aims 1 and 2, we will identify discrete CPSP phenotypes, and recapitulate them in animal models for improved translatability. We expect the IMPETUS program to 1) identify distinct somatosensory, neural, immune, affective and cognitive mechanisms that contribute to distinct CPSP phenotypes and explain inter-patient heterogeneity, with cross-species validation; 2) Characterize distinct phenotypic clusters within CPSP to inform personalized patient care and stratified clinical trials for CPSP interventions; and 3) Develop animal models that recapitulate specific clinical phenotypes of CPSP to accelerate for mechanistic exploration and novel therapeutic development.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Transspinal Magnetic Stimulation for the Treatment of Neuropathic Pain
Project Number: 1R18EB036591-01

Abstract:
ABSTRACT.
 Chronic pain ranks among the top reasons for seeking medical attention. Spinal Cord Stimulation (SCS) has
been a traditional approach for managing chronic neuropathic pain in the back and legs. This method, however,
involves an invasive procedure that requires the patient to live with an implant. In contrast, Low-Intensity Focused
Ultrasound (LIFU) presents a non-invasive alternative explored in clinical trials for modifying central nervous
system activity, promising quicker neuromodulation for pain relief. Our research shows that a brief, three-minute
LIFU treatment targeting the dorsal root ganglion (DRG) can suppress pain responses in small and large animal
models for extended periods. Yet, targeting other crucial spinal areas for pain management, like the dorsal
columns, remains a challenge due to anatomical constraints.
 Building on the development of an advanced miniaturized Transcranial Stimulation (TMS) system, our project
aims to create a groundbreaking High Frequency (HF) Trans-Spinal Magnetic Stimulation (TSMS) tool. This new
system draws upon previous successes in dorsal column stimulation research and numerical simulations, setting
the stage for the first non-invasive dorsal spinal cord stimulation to address back pain. Utilizing a novel 10kHz
magnetic pulse, the HF-TSMS system mirrors the frequency used in invasive SCS treatments, which have been
effective in managing sciatica and significantly reducing opioid use among patients.
 We aim to refine HF-TSMS to target neural pathways involved in neuropathic back and leg pain. To achieve
this, we plan to conduct experimental studies using rodent models at Massachusetts General Hospital, assessing
pain responses via fMRI. Further efficacy and safety evaluations will be conducted in larger animal models at
the University of Arizona. Following these studies, we aim to secure an Investigational Device Exemption (IDE)
and initiate a preclinical pilot trial in humans suffering from neuropathic pain. The introduction of HF-TSMS as a
non-invasive, drug-free treatment option could significantly impact the management of chronic neuropathic pain,
offering new hope for patients with sciatica.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Sleep, pain, and recovery in kids after pediatric intensive care (SPARK-PICU)
Project Number: 1R01HL174653-01

Abstract:
Project Summary
More than 250,000 children survive pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) hospitalization each year in the United
States, yet we have an incomplete understanding of recovery trajectory and modifiable factors to optimize
survivorship. PICU survivors have multisystem diseases and suffer multisystem morbidities many years after
hospital discharge in physical, cognitive, and psychosocial health domains. Our preliminary data indicate
presence of clinically significant pain among 1 in 3 children and sleep disturbances in over 50% of children
months to years after PICU hospitalization, placing them at risk for poorer long-term health outcomes.
However, key knowledge gaps remain in understanding risk factors and mechanisms for persistent pain and
sleep disturbances in PICU survivors, limiting potential interventions that could have broad implications for
long-term recovery. For example, PICU survivors are known to suffer substantial cognitive impairments,
particularly within the executive function construct, crucial to long-term academic achievement, quality of life,
and psychosocial well-being. Chronic pain and sleep disturbances are potentially modifiable, and linked to
worse executive function in other pediatric populations. However, we have an incomplete understanding of the
impact of pain and sleep on executive function outcomes in PICU survivors. The central hypothesis of this
proposal is that pain and sleep disturbances are important post-PICU morbidities that are key mediators
between acute illness factors, psychosocial vulnerabilities and executive function outcomes in children after
critical illness.
We will conduct a longitudinal outcomes study of PICU survivors aged 8-18 years with the following objectives:
1) Identify pain trajectories and biopsychosocial risk factors for chronic pain in PICU survivors; 2) Elucidate
longitudinal sleep disturbances in PICU survivors and sleep-pain associations over 12 months; 3) Test the
impact of sleep and pain on EF outcomes in PICU survivors over 12-months. The study will utilize objective
measures of acute illness severity, novel metrics of psychosocial vulnerabilities, and a mix of objective
assessment and subjective report of pain, sleep, and executive function outcomes to comprehensively
evaluate temporal and mediating relationships 3, 6, and 12-months after PICU hospitalization. This proposal is
significant because it addresses the common and debilitating morbidities of chronic pain and sleep
disturbances that affect thousands of PICU survivors annually. Our data will identify risk factors across a
biopsychosocial framework to improve identification and treatment of pain and sleep disturbances, and aligns
with the National Institutes of Health Sleep Disorders Research Plan and Federal Pain Research Strategy. This
research will provide a greater understanding of sleep, pain, and executive function in PICU survivors key for
designing and implementing interventions aimed at optimizing recovery.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Hawaii N CREW Research Resource Center
Project Number: 1OT2DA062969-01

Abstract:
Native Hawaiians, the Indigenous people of Hawaii, have a rich cultural background yet
continue to face challenges resulting in significant disparities in addiction and chronic pain rates.
Native Hawaiians show lower participation in treatment programs compared to other ethnic
groups. There is a rising acknowledgment of Native Hawaiian healing traditions that emphasize
resilience and community empowerment. Additionally, more research regarding treatments from
an Indigenous perspective is needed. Recent efforts have supported Native Hawaiian wellness
models for healing, requiring Indigenous approaches to research. The Hawaii HEAL Research
Resource Center, a collaborative initiative involving practitioners and researchers, strives to
improve culturally responsive substance abuse and mental health care for Native Hawaiians. In
the planning phase, specific aims include: (1) Convening Native Hawaiian HEAL Planning
Group to guide the direction of our efforts and ensure that all strategies are culturally aligned
with Native Hawaiian community needs using relational design; (2) Developing and providing
comprehensive, real-time resources and support to one or more Native Hawaiian Serving
Organizations as they enhance research capacity; and (3) Identifying effective strategies and
approaches for supporting Native Hawaiian Serving Organizations as they develop and conduct
HEAL-related research and data improvement projects. The center will align efforts with Native
Hawaiian community needs, enhance research capacity, and support data improvement
projects. The Hawaii HEAL Research Resource Center, in collaboration with Native Hawaiian-
serving organizations, aims to improve addiction and pain management outcomes for Native
Hawaiian communities. By integrating Native Hawaiian healing practices and Indigenous
research methods, the initiative not only builds research capacity, but it also promotes equitable
healthcare, cultural respect and safety, and community well-being, ultimately leading to better
health outcomes, a stronger sense of community and long-term healing.
This study is part of the NIH’s Helping to End Addiction Long-term (HEAL) initiative to speed scientific solutions for the overdose epidemic, including opioid and stimulant use disorders, and the crisis of chronic pain. The NIH HEAL Initiative bolsters research across NIH to improve treatment for opioid misuse and addiction and acute and chronic pain.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Functional consequences of the interactions between tau protein and opioids
Project Number: 1R21DA058746-01A1

Abstract:
PROJECT SUMMARY
The opioid epidemic is a persistent public health crisis that has been worsened by the COVID19 pandemic.
Efforts to curtail this epidemic have had minimal success in halting its continued progression. There is a critical
need to more fully understand the neurobiology of opioid use disorder so that highly novel therapeutics can be
developed. Recent clinical and preclinical studies have found that opioid use increases the levels of phosphory-
lated tau protein in the brain, especially in the prefrontal cortex. The prefrontal cortex plays a significant role in
the control of opioid use. Hyperphosphorylated tau is a hallmark of neurodegenerative tauopathy-related dis-
eases such as Alzheimer’s Disease and frontotemporal dementia. However, opioid use does not appear to be a
major predisposing factor in the development of these diseases. This begs the question of whether opioid-in-
duced increases in phosphorylated tau are a simple byproduct of opioid use with no significant role in brain
health, or if this increase has significant biological relevance for mediating the neurobehavioral consequences
of opioid use. Focusing research efforts on whether opioid use produces neurodegenerative diseases may lead
to a missed opportunity to explore a non-neurodegenerative role for opioid-induced changes in tau biology. It is
known that hyperphosphorylated tau can and tau oligomerization alter neurotransmission long before tau-related
pathology is observable. Therefore, we reason that opioid-induced increases in phosphorylated tau and tau oli-
gomerization may alter prefrontal cortical neurotransmission in the absence of any overt pathology. This project
proposal tests the hypothesis that opioids produce enhanced tau phosphorylation and oligomerization in the
prefrontal cortex leading to synaptic dysfunction and elevated opioid consumption. We will focus on the opioid
oxycodone in this project due its long-term use to treat pain as well as its common misuse in those with opioid
use disorder. We will use a multidisciplinary approach to test for a causative role for prefrontal cortical tau in
producing synaptic dysfunction and enhancing oxycodone consumption. This project is high-risk, high-reward. It
is conceivable that opioid-induced changes in tau have nothing to do with synaptic changes or oxycodone con-
sumption. However, if there is a connection between opioid-induced changes in tau biology and synaptic
changes and opioid use, then this will be a paradigm shift for the opioid research field. In the future, after some
additional exploration, we may be able to leverage therapeutics originally designed to treat neurodegenerative
tauopathies to treat opioid use disorder. This would be an entirely new avenue for combatting the opioid epi-
demic.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Molecular pharmacology of xylazine at adrenoceptors: Relation to necrotic skin lesions associated with chronic intravenous administration
Project Number: 1R21DA061097-01

Abstract:
PROJECT SUMMARY/ABSTRACT
The α2-adrenergic receptor (α2R) agonist xylazine has been used in veterinary medicine for decades
owing to its anesthetic, muscle relaxant, and analgesic properties. Since the mid-2000’s however, illicit
use of xylazine has grown dramatically and over the last few years alone, the illicit use of xylazine-
adulterated opioids, including fentanyl, has increased exponentially. Xylazine use in humans is linked
to well-documented adverse effects including respiratory depression, hypotension, or bradycardia,
which can all be directly coupled to its mechanism as an α2R agonist. Significantly, repeated
intravenous injection of xylazine in humans has been associated with necrotizing skin ulceration that is
independent of bacterial etiology and is xylazine-specific. Despite the recent increase in illicit xylazine
use, the molecular mechanisms related to xylazine’s action at α2Rs remain poorly understood, as is
the mechanism of xylazine-mediated skin necrosis. This project is directly linked to the basic research
areas of interest in this Notice of Special Interest from NIDA. We hypothesize that xylazine exhibits
unique agonist binding and functional profiles at peripheral α2 and α1Rs and that its ulcerative effects
on the skin associated with intravenous injection are due to peripheral α2/α1R-mediated
vasoconstriction, which causes hypoperfusion and hypoxia upon repeated exposure leading to skin
necrosis. We propose three specific aims to address this hypothesis. In Aim 1, we will assess the
binding affinity of xylazine compared to the structurally distinct αR agonists clonidine, moxonidine, α-
methylnorepinephrine and epinephrine at agonist-occupied conformations of each of the six α2/α1R
subtypes (α1A, α1B, α1D, α2A, 2B, 2C), expressed in translationally-relevant venous and arterial
smooth muscle cells (VSMC). In Aim 2, we will utilize novel TRUPATH G protein-biosensors in both
venous and arterial VSMC to assess the functional effects of xylazine compared to the other agonists
at α1A, α1B, α1D, α2A, α2B, and α2CRs engaged with differing Gαβγ combinations. This aim will inform
on xylazine-induced α1R/α2R signaling and will gauge distinct G protein bias that the agent may
possess, compared to the other α1R/α2R agonists. In Aim 3, we will directly test the hypothesis that IV
xylazine-induced skin necrosis in vivo is caused by a peripheral α2R-mediated mechanism associated
with vasoconstriction and resulting hypoperfusion and hypoxia. Together, these aims will fill gaps in the
literature related to xylazine binding and function in both venous and arterial VSMC as well as
mechanisms of IV xylazine-induced skin necrosis.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Cogito:  A turnkey solution for rapidly developing, evaluating, deploying, and scaling digital therapeutics
Project Number: 1R43DA060729-01

Abstract:
Digital therapeutics are transforming healthcare. Digital therapeutics are clinical-grade software used
to prevent, treat, or manage a medical disorder or disease. A large body of research demonstrates that digital
therapeutics can have a major impact on health costs, health behavior, and health outcomes. For example, in
our work, digital therapeutics for substance use disorders (SUDs) more than double drug abstinence rates
compared to standard addiction treatment systems in the U.S. and greatly increase retention in SUD treatment.
They also have synergistic effects with medication treatments for SUDs. And, they are associated with marked
reductions in ED visits, inpatient utilization, and net costs, and increases in medication adherence.
Despite their impressive clinical value, several challenges persist in fully realizing the potential of digital
therapeutics to improve people’s lives across the globe. First, the pace at which digital therapeutics are
developed, tested and commercialized is slow. Second, many development activities are redundant across
projects. Third, due to budget, time and capacity constraints, many scientists develop prototypes of digital
therapeutics that can be used in research trials but which are not built to scale for use by large numbers of end
users. Finally, most digital therapeutics cannot be readily adapted for use by various target populations critical
for advancing digital health equity (e.g., adapted to culture, language, race, ethnicity, sexual orientation).
 Based on over two decades of NIH-supported work developing, evaluating and commercializing digital
therapeutics, we have developed a unique digital therapeutics platform (Laddr) which integrates science-
based, therapeutic processes to address a wide range of behavioral problems within a single digital platform.
This platform offers the potential to revolutionize digital health - as it provides a scalable model for delivering
digital therapeutics to treat any disorder with a behavioral component. We now plan to make an editable
version of Laddr (which we call Cogito) commercially available to developers of digital therapeutics. Cogito will
provide a turnkey solution for rapidly developing, evaluating, deploying, and scaling digital therapeutics for the
prevention, treatment and/or management of any disease or disorder - via a drag and drop interface with no
programming necessary.
 In this Phase 1 SBIR application, we will finalize several features of the Cogito platform to increase its
commercial potential as a turnkey platform for developing and hosting digital therapeutics. And we will assess
the feasibility, technical merit, and commercial potential of the Cogito digital therapeutics platform via usability
testing with clinical researchers. We will focus on the usability of Cogito with researchers in the field of SUD
treatment in this initial phase and then expand to a broad clinical research community focused on the
prevention, treatment, or management of various health conditions in future iterations of this work. Overall,
Cogito offers great promise to markedly accelerate the pace and impact of science based digital therapeutics.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Prevalence and Impact of frailty in older adults with polymyalgia rheumatica
Project Number: 1R03AG082983-01A1

Abstract:
ABSTRACT
Polymyalgia rheumatica (PMR) is the most common systemic rheumatic disease affecting older adults. Despite
this, PMR remains critically understudied. One in three individuals with PMR have persistent symptoms for
several years, which leads to prolonged use of glucocorticoids and prescribed analgesics. Gaps in
understanding why symptoms persist and treatment is prolonged have limited the development of interventions
to improve the well-being of this vulnerable population. Frailty is a syndrome of aging characterized by
increased vulnerability to stressors and associated with increased morbidity and mortality. Preliminary data has
shown a high prevalence of frailty in patients with PMR and an association with worse self-reported pain and
physical function. Frailty might identify a subset of older adults with PMR with worse symptoms and at risk for
prolonged treatment, where tailored interventions and management could lead to improved outcomes. Physical
activity interventions such as physical and occupational therapy (PT/OT), have been shown to improve
symptoms and mobility in older adults with chronic musculoskeletal conditions. Little is known about the factors
that determine access to PT/OT in older adults with PMR as well the impact of PT/OT utilization on
glucocorticoid treatment duration. Instead of utilizing a disease-centric approach, this proposal intends to
address existing knowledge gaps by better understanding the impact of a clinically relevant geriatric syndrome
and the potential benefits of function modification in older adults with PMR. In the absence of large cohorts,
large administrative data allows the study of older adults with PMR and the assessment of frailty, medication
usage, and PT/OT interventions, to effectively address important knowledge gaps and inform healthcare
interventions. This study will utilize Medicare data to create an inception cohort of older adults with PMR
(incident PMR) and achieve the following 2 aims. In Aim, we 1 will determine the association of frailty with
glucocorticoid duration and prescription analgesic use. And in Aim 2, we will examine the association of the
utilization of PT services with glucocorticoid duration in older adults with PMR, including its effect on frail and
non-frail older adults with PMR. This proposal will provide a novel focus assessing the impact of frailty in older
adults with PMR utilizing real-world and population-level data. Understanding the role of frailty in these patients
could change the paradigm of treatment of PMR, highlighting the importance function modification
management complementing disease-oriented treatment. Better understanding of the use of PT/OT
interventions in older adults with PMR could be expanded to older adults living with other systemic rheumatic
diseases. This proposal will also support my training and transition towards a career as an independent
clinician-scientist focused on improving the care of older adults living with systemic rheumatic diseases.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Exploring Reactivity Among Patients with Chronic Pain Using Cannabis and Opioids: Mixed-Method Evidence of Promising Intervention Strategies
Project Number: 1F32DA061600-01

Abstract:
PROJECT SUMMARY
 The opioid epidemic in the United States is a public health crisis stemming from prescription opioid use,
accessibility to potent synthetic opioids, and alarmingly frequent unintentional fatal overdoses. Chronic pain
significantly contributes to this crisis, affecting over 100 million citizens in the United States, surpassing the
incidences of diabetes, heart disease, and cancer. Moreover, prolonged use of prescription opioids for pain
management markedly escalates the likelihood of heroin initiation and the development of opioid use disorder
(OUD), with approximately 10% of patients with chronic pain eventually developing OUD. It is imperative to
address these risks by investigating factors contributing to the reduction of prescription opioid use, potentially
leading to a decline in adverse health outcomes, instances of OUD, and unintentional fatal overdose cases.
 Non-opioid treatments, including cannabis and cannabinoid-derived products, are increasingly
considered for chronic pain management, with over 24 million United States citizens using cannabis for its
analgesic properties. Although clinical trials indicate a significant analgesic effect of cannabinoids compared to
placebo, there remains a scarcity of research on effectiveness and potential negative consequences.
Moreover, the expanding legalization of medical and recreational cannabis in the United States presents novel
opportunities to explore the relationship between opioids and cannabis use in patients with chronic pain.
However, notable constraints limit early evidence from studies on opioid and cannabis use in patients with
chronic pain, including recall bias, which affects cross-sectional data analyses. Consequently, the existing
literature inadequately addresses the factors related to chronic pain that influence opioid and cannabis use in
these patients. Intensive longitudinal studies with ecological momentary assessment may address these
limitations and offer valuable insights into the mechanisms facilitating opioid and cannabis use for chronic pain.
 In the current proposal, I have designed a mixed-methods study to expedite the development of
interventions targeting the negative consequences of opioid and cannabis use among patients with chronic
pain. This project entails advanced secondary quantitative analyses of real-time smartphone-based ecological
momentary assessment data from my primary sponsor’s NIDA R21 (R21 DA048175; PI: Thrul). Then, I will
conduct an original semi-structured interview-based qualitative study using purposive maximum variation
sampling of local expert substance use clinicians working with patients with chronic pain who use cannabis and
opioids for their analgesic properties. This project establishes a foundation for intervention development for
patients with chronic pain at risk of consequences from cannabis or opioid use; it also aligns with NIDA's
primary objective of determining the impact of substance use and addiction on individuals, families, peers, and
society, addressing a shared goal and pivotal priority funding topic – the ongoing opioid epidemic.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Targeting Reinforcement Mechanisms for Smoking Cessation Using Very Low Nicotine Content Cigarettes in Individuals with Opioid Use Disorder and Chronic Pain
Project Number: 1R34DA060477-01A1

Abstract:
Tobacco smoking, opioid use disorder, and chronic pain are highly comorbid conditions, and
smoking cessation in this population is extremely difficult to achieve. Co-administration of
nicotine and opioids results in mutual enhancement of positive reinforcement, which is likely to
contribute to persistent smoking in the context of opioid agonist therapy, such as office-based
buprenorphine treatment (OBBT). Moreover, nicotine has been shown to provide mild, short-
term anti-nociceptive effects, which may contribute to powerful negative reinforcement in
individuals with chronic pain. The goal of the proposed research is to examine whether
switching to very low nicotine content (VLNC) cigarettes can directly weaken these positive and
negative reinforcement cycles to improve cessation outcomes among people who smoke (PWS)
receiving OBBT with non-cancer chronic pain. The research will employ a randomized between-
subjects design to evaluate the effects of smoking VLNCs versus normal nicotine content (NNC)
cigarettes on smoking behavior, pain, craving and withdrawal symptoms, and motivation to quit
smoking. Ecological momentary assessment (EMA) will be used to examine changes in
bidirectional associations between pain, timing of buprenorphine dose, and smoking urge and
behavior as a function of cigarette condition. Participants will complete 1-week of baseline EMA
while smoking their usual brand of cigarettes; they will then be randomized to 4-weeks of NNCs
or VLNCs. EMA will continue during weeks 1 and 4 of study cigarette use. Participants will
attend weekly in-person visits to obtain biomarker verification of cigarette compliance and
complete self-report measures. At baseline and at the end of 4-weeks of study cigarette use, a
24-hr smoking abstinence test will be used to assess withdrawal symptoms, pain intensity and
sensitivity, and demand for usual brand cigarettes. At the conclusion of study cigarette use,
participants will engage in qualitative interviews about their experiences to guide treatment
development, and they will be provided with nicotine lozenges to support cessation. In general,
we hypothesize that switching to VLNCs will attenuate the bidirectional associations between
smoking, pain, and timing of buprenorphine administration as assessed via EMA, and will lead
to decreased symptoms of withdrawal and pain during the 24-hour abstinence test. We also
hypothesize that VLNCs will be associated with increased willingness to make a quit attempt,
and greater duration of achieved abstinence. These results will provide critical insights into the
role of nicotine in maintaining smoking/pain/opioid associations and the potential for VLNCs to
extinguish learned associations to promote smoking cessation in this vulnerable population.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Molecular and Cellular Profiling of the Habenulointerpeduncular Circuit in Opioid Tolerance and Withdrawal
Project Number: 1R01DA059455-01A1

Abstract:
ABSTRACT
The present crisis of opioid addiction in the United States highlights how an initial exposure to opioids, often
oxycodone, as a medical patient can lead to escalation of use, misuse and eventually addiction. Chronic
exposure to oxycodone produces tolerance to many of its effects, and it is this development of tolerance that
leads to taking increasingly higher doses and to withdrawal upon abstinence. Drug-induced adaptations in gene
expression and neuronal function are thought to underlie the development of tolerance and withdrawal, but the
mechanisms by which this occurs remain unclear. We have found that the habenula-interpeduncular nucleus
(IPN), which plays a prominent role in limiting nicotine intake and in nicotine withdrawal responds to chronic
nicotine by upregulating nitric oxide synthase 1 (NOS1), and that this same adaptation occurs in response to
chronic oxycodone exposure. Acute exposure to oxycodone is not sufficient to upregulate NOS1 in the IPN.
Using viral approaches, purification of tagged ribosomes followed by next gen sequencing and oral oxycodone
in the drinking water of adult male and female mice, we will examine gene expression in the IPN – both in the
presynaptic terminals and postsynaptic IPN neurons - and correlate neuronal calcium dynamics with intoxication
and withdrawal behavior. We will also examine the contribution of NOS1 to drug-induced changes in gene
expression in neuronal activity and axon terminals from the medial habenula within the interpeduncular nucleus.
Together these aims will establish a preclinical model of opioid tolerance that may provide a basis for evaluating
potential new therapeutics in the treatment of opioid use disorder.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Developing A Diverse Workforce: Advancing Data Science for Addiction Research and Professional Training (ADAPT)
Project Number: 1R25DA061740-01

Abstract:
Project Summary
As we work to build addiction data science literacy, our field could benefit from increased diversity of background
and perspectives in the workforce. The complexities of addiction as a clinical domain present challenges,
including the intersection of mental health and chronic pain. Understanding how these factors influence data
collection, often due to subjective reporting, the influence of stigma, health disparities, and longstanding barriers
to care, can impact data analytics and interpretation. Moreover, the separation between clinical and data experts
can create additional challenges to advancing the field. Aligning the addiction background with data science
expertise could enhance the potential of emerging addiction researchers. Another impediment to progress is a
need for more diversity in our workforce, which could be partly attributed to a lack of awareness of the field during
training (undergraduate to postgraduate).Developing training for a diverse workforce that understands
challenges at the intersection of addiction and data science will accelerate our understanding of addiction's
complexity. The long-term goal of this Developing a Diverse Workforce: Advancing Data Science for Addiction
Research and Professional Training (ADAPT) R25 application is to support the training of a diverse workforce
by building an addiction data science short course and scalable educational content with a focus on addiction
data analytics through a health equity lens. The overall objective of this proposal is to provide the curated
research framework and resources to support emerging investigators with diverse data science addiction
approaches. Our central hypothesis involves developing an addiction data science training program that will
expand the research capacity of diverse emerging investigators. We will achieve the goals of this proposal
through the following aims: Aim 1- Develop and refine immersive, tailored addiction data science skills course
that provides hands-on demonstrations, tutorials, and presentations on FAIR (Findable, Accessible,
Interoperable, Reusable) data principles, computational analytical methods (AI and ML), systems modeling, NLP,
and analysis and linking of addiction big data. Aim 2- Incorporate novel methods of program evaluation and
dissemination, which will include leveraging NLP modalities to mine academic databases using advanced
analytics to capture participant outcomes. At the successful completion of the proposed research, the expected
outcome is a scalable and widely disseminated education intervention for addiction data science with enduring
content to support emerging researchers, removing many of the barriers to traditional pathways (e.g.,
asynchronous conceptual and project-based content that is widely available). This R25 ADAPT project will
provide a strong basis for the conceptual foundation needed to begin addiction data science research without
sustained effort from a limited pool of addiction data science experts. This research aligns with the mission of
NIH NIDA to train a diverse workforce to perform addiction data science research at the highest quality levels.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Depot formulations for on-demand tamper- and diversion-proof delivery of opioids
Project Number: 1R21DA058120-01A1

Abstract:
Summary
Opioids are commonly prescribed for a variety of acute and chronic pain states. Unfortunately,
prescribed opioids can be tampered with or diverted, both of which can have severe
consequences (e.g., lethal overdose). Tamper-resistant formulations have had limited success,
and cannot prevent diversion of drugs. Injectable formulations that can deposit an extended
course of treatment in the body would make diversion nearly impossible once administered, but
most, if stolen, can still be tampered with (and the opioid extracted) by relatively simple means.
Importantly, once administered to patients, they deliver drugs at a rate that does not change
with the varying needs of the patient. They are therefore unusable for acute pain: if opioids were
continuously released at a rate adequate for acute pain, patients would be narcotized for
extended periods. Here, we propose to develop depot formulations made of polymers which are
attached covalently to opioids by photolabile linkers. The depots would be injected
subcutaneously by healthcare providers, for example, prior to discharge after a procedure. The
covalent linkers would render the depots difficult to tamper with, as the drug cannot be easily
removed from stolen devices by simple dissolution in organic solvents. Moreover, having been
injected into the body the formulations could not be diverted from patients. The covalent
bonding prevents the drug from being active even after injection, and the drug is only released
by irradiation – not polymer degradation. However, since the bonds are photolabile, the patient
would be able to release the drug with a simple handheld or wearable light source. This
approach would allow patients to determine the timing, intensity, and duration of analgesia
throughout the postoperative period.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Co-use of cannabis and prescription opioids in emerging adults in medical settings
Project Number: 1R01DA058489-01A1

Abstract:
The transition from adolescence to adulthood is characterized by increased rates of prescription opioid use and related problems. These rates may be even higher among emerging adults who use cannabis. National surveys show cannabis use is rising in young adults and is related to increased opioid use and opioid use disorder. However, there is a substantial gap in our knowledge of what individual risk factors might contribute to the development of opioid and cannabis co-use and related problems, and we know little about co-use in the context of pain. Identifying malleable factors that convey risk for problematic opioid use in the context of cannabis co-use would inform the development of preventive interventions that could be targeted to modify substance use risk for emerging adults in medical settings. Emerging adults receive the lowest level of preventative medical care when compared to all other developmental stages. Thus, a single medical encounter in which opioid medications are prescribed to manage acute pain offers a unique window into substance use patterns, and a unique opportunity to develop and deliver future interventions. The proposed study will utilize a developmental model of the impact of opioid exposure by legitimate prescription during emerging adulthood, with consideration for existing substance use, as well as pain and psychosocial experiences of the individual. This prospective cohort study will enroll emerging adults (ages 18-25) who either have no lifetime history of cannabis (5% of sample) or have used cannabis in the past month (95% of sample) and are prescribed an opioid for acute pain management in the course of routine outpatient healthcare. These participants will be followed closely during the 2-weeks post-prescription, and then prospectively for 2 years, with multimethod assessments to capture short- and long-term trajectories of opioid and cannabis co-use in the context of pain experiences. The central hypothesis is that pain experiences as well as patterns of opioid and cannabis use in the acute pain period will influence opioid use, cannabis use, and related problems over time. We will also examine the contributory roles of psychosocial and pain-related risk and protective factors, including the use of non-pharmacologic pain management strategies and prescription characteristics. Objective data on dispensed opioid medications will be obtained from medical records and prescription drug monitoring databases, and bioassay data will verify self-report of substance use. Daily associations between pain experiences, pain catastrophizing, negative and positive affect, use of non-pharmacologic pain management strategies, cannabis use, and opioid use will also be examined. Importantly, many of these risk and protective factors can be impacted with biobehavioral treatments. Determining which malleable risk and protective factors are most important during this developmental period will provide critical information for the design of interventions aimed at reducing substance use disorders and chronic pain in emerging adults.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: A Mobile Health Behavior Intervention to Reduce Pain and Improve Health-III (MORPH-III)
Project Number: 1R01AG082777-01A1

Abstract:
PROJECT SUMMARY
As many as three in four older adults live with chronic pain; a debilitating condition that affects quality of life
and independence. Unfortunately, chronic pain both affects and is affected by low levels of physical activity,
excess sustained sedentary time, weight gain, and isolation. Across Stage Ia and Ib pilot trials, we have
demonstrated the feasibility, acceptability, and potential benefit of a remote group-mediated behavioral
intervention rooted in social cognitive and self-determination theories that targets dietary weight loss via caloric
restriction and both increased physical activity and decreased sitting via the accumulation of steps in frequent
bouts throughout the day (daylong physical activity). Limitations of previous research include: short duration
(12 weeks), small samples (up to 44 participants per study), and the inclusion of heterogeneous pain sites. The
primary purpose of this Stage II R01 is to test the efficacy of 6 months of a remotely delivered group-mediated
weight loss+daylong movement on daily steps (primary outcome), pain interference (secondary outcome), body
weight, pain intensity, quality of life, and key psychosocial antecedents of behavior change in older adults with
chronic knee or hip osteoarthritic pain. We will also explore for effects on long-term behavior change over 12
months following the intervention. We propose to randomize low-active older adults with chronic osteoarthritic
pain and obesity to the weight loss+daylong physical activity intervention or to an enhanced usual care control.
These individuals will receive the same self-monitoring technologies as the intervention condition to account for
any effect of basic device provision on activity and diet behavior. The results of this trial will inform future real-
world efficacy and effectiveness trials of a package well-suited to broad scale delivery.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Increasing the Capacity of a Community-Based Research Center to Address Opioid Use Disorder and Related Health Inequities in Urban American Indian Communities
Project Number: 1OT2DA062972-01

Abstract:
Abstract
Title: Increasing the Capacity of a Community-Based Research Center to Address Opioid Use
Disorder and Related Health Inequities in Urban American Indian Communities
The Native American Community Clinic (NACC) research center, The CEDAR Center, proposes
a two-year project to increase their research capacity and evaluate culturally-centered models of
care for urban-dwelling American Indians struggling with opioid use disorder (OUD) and related
conditions. As an Indigenous-led Federally Qualified Health Center (FQHC) serving over 4,500
American Indian/ Alaska Native (AI/AN) patients annually, NACC’s research center is uniquely
positioned to conduct research inline with the organization's mission to provide care through a
culturally-centered model that integrates Western and Indigenous knowledge systems to
address the opioid crisis and related health inequities.
Our project will:
1. Build capacity to conduct local community-based HEAL-prioritized research by:
a. Increasing key staff
b. Developing research policies, practices, and procedures
c. Establishing a Community Advisory Board
d. Establishing a Scientific Advisory Board
2. Enhance NACC's model of integrating cultural healing practices within a Western
 community health center to address OUD/SUD, overdose, and related health and
 wellness factors.
3. Prepare a NIDA proposal for a full-scale project testing the impact of our culturally
 centered model.
a. Employing a mixed methodological pilot approach, including analysis of existing
 clinical data, community surveys, focus groups, and interviews, we will assess
 our culturally-centered model's effectiveness and identify improvement areas.
Throughout the project, we will focus on building sustainable research capacity within our
organization and community. This includes training AI/AN staff in research methods,
establishing data governance protocols, and creating pathways for community members to
engage in all stages of the research process.
This project aims to improve health outcomes and overall wellness for urban AI/AN people by
developing and evaluating culturally centered, community-driven approaches to OUD treatment
and prevention. Our findings will inform larger-scale intervention studies and contribute to the
evidence base for holistic Indigenous healthcare models addressing the opioid crisis.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Imaging of pain sources in myofascial pain syndrome
Project Number: 1R61EB036967-01

Abstract:
PROJECT SUMMARY
Myofascial pain syndrome (MPS) is one of the most common forms of acute and chronic musculoskeletal pain, 
a common cause for opioid use, and affects 10-15% of patients seen in general medical clinics. Central to this 
syndrome are myofascial trigger points (MTrPs), hard, palpable, discrete, and localized nodules that produce 
referred pain and local tenderness at the site upon compression. Despite its prevalence and clinical significance, 
the pathophysiology of MPS is not well understood. The subjective nature of current diagnostic methods and a 
lack of objective markers of MPS, hinders the precision of diagnosis and treatment. There is therefore a clinical 
need for improved diagnostic tools sensitive to the complex multifactorial (compositional, vascular and 
neurogenic) factors of MPS, that can unravel the intricate mechanisms of MPS and enhance patient care.
Imaging offers objective measures of multiple disease features to improve the diagnosis and assessment of 
MTrPs and MPS. MRI, with its excellent soft-tissue contrast, can provide detailed anatomical information of 
skeletal muscle and fascia. Further, quantitative methods can probe muscle microstructure [Diffusion Tensor 
Imaging (DTI) and Diffusion Kurtosis Imaging (DKI)], microcirculatory velocity [Intravoxel Incoherent Motion 
(IVIM)], local contraction (dynamic Diffusion Weighted Imaging), muscle and fascial fibrosis and densification 
[Ultra-Short Echo Time (UTE) MRI]. Synergistically, PET imaging, with its sensitivity to functional and metabolic 
process, provides a tool for assessment of inflammatory processes including neurogenic inflammation.
This work aims to develop PET and MRI methods to identify novel imaging biomarkers that can diagnose and 
characterize MTrPs in MPS. Our Specific Aims are (1) develop clinically-translatable [18F]FDG PET-MRI imaging 
markers that can reflect disease and pain mechanisms and characterize MTrPs in MPS; (2) evaluate whether 
PET and MRI biomarkers are able to differentiate the microstructural, compositional, functional and metabolic 
changes in MPS patients from normal myofascial and neurogenic features in age and sex matched controls as 
between MPS patients with pain in their upper back muscles (Trapezius, Rhomboid Major an Minor, and Levator 
Scapulae) and the same muscles on their non-painful contralateral side. If successful, based on an receiver 
operator characteristics (ROC) area under the curve (AUC) of 0.7, we will (3) evaluate our imaging approaches 
in a single-blind randomized clinical trial of patients being treated with ultrasound guided muscle anesthetic 
injections and a sham injection to evaluate treatment response and differences between treatment groups.
The significance of our work is the development of novel biomarkers that can objectively diagnosis and 
characterize tissue level changes in MTrPs and MPS . Our key innovation is the development of PET and MRI 
tools to assess specific mechanisms of theorized MPS and MTrPs pathophysiology as well as mechanisms of 
pain generation in MPS. Our investigative team includes experts in novel imaging techniques, clinical 
assessment and treatment of pain, and clinical studies evaluating both imaging markers and treatment response.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Efficacy of intravenous sub-dissociative ketamine versus intravenous morphine in children with acute pain.
Project Number: 1U01HD116253-01

Abstract:
Project Summary
Pain is one of the most common reasons for children to visit an emergency department (ED) and is associated with short-
and long-term consequences when inadequately treated. Intravenous (IV) morphine is the prototypical and most
commonly administered parenteral analgesia for treating moderate to severe acute pain in children. However, IV
morphine is associated with acute adverse events such as respiratory depression and hypotension. In addition, there is
hesitation amongst caregivers and clinicians to administer opioids to children, leading to withholding or under-dosing
analgesics in children with pain and thereby perpetuating the undertreatment of pain and the resulting short- and long-term
sequelae. Ketamine is an NMDA-antagonist that has the potential to improve both short- and long-term sequelae of acute
pain experienced by children presenting to the ED. IV ketamine has been shown to be an effective and safe analgesic
when given using sub-dissociative doses to adults with acute pain in the ED or pre-hospital setting. Sub-dissociative
ketamine's analgesic efficacy and favorable safety profiles make it an attractive alternative to morphine. In addition,
ketamine may improve pain-related function and decrease potential long-term sequelae of acute painful events such as
chronic pain and medication dependency, post-traumatic stress disorder, anxiety and depression. The aims of this study
are to demonstrate that IV sub-dissociative ketamine is as effective as IV morphine for treating acute pain in children and
that its rate of cardiorespiratory events is substantially less compared to morphine. Additionally, we aim to determine if
children who receive ketamine will have better levels of pain-related function during the first week after ED presentation,
and have greater odds of experiencing more favorable post-traumatic stress, anxiety and depression outcomes up to 6
months following their ED visit. We will achieve these aims by conducting an 8-site phase 3 randomized clinical trial
within the Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network (PECARN) comparing IV sub-dissociative ketamine to
IV morphine in children presenting to the ED with acute pain. We will enroll 1010 children 6 to 17 years of age with
moderate to severe acute pain and require IV morphine for analgesia. In addition, we will study children who most
commonly receive parenteral opioids in the ED, namely those with abdominal pain or extremity fractures. We will collect
measures of pain intensity and analgesic efficacy and assess for acute adverse events during the child's ED course and
conduct follow-up procedures assessing pain-related function, analgesic use/misuse, mental health and behavioral
outcomes up to 6 months after the index ED visit. The findings of this study have the potential to fundamentally change
how acute pain is managed in children and improve both their short- and long-term health. Achieving our aims would
provide the necessary evidence to inform guidelines and support a transition from morphine to a non-opioid analgesic
such as sub-dissociative ketamine as the primary treatment modality for children with moderate to severe acute pain.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Sickle Cell Disease Pain Analgesia And Integrative Network
Project Number: 1U24AT012868-01

Abstract:
PROJECT SUMMARY/ABSTRACT
Our goal is to build Sickle Cell Disease Pain Analgesia and Integrative Network (SCDPAIN) as an innovative,
dynamic and interactive platform that will advance the NCCIH's bold mission for research on pain mechanisms
in sickle cell disease (SCD). Pain is one of the major comorbidities of SCD leading to poor quality of life,
frequent opioid use and reduced survival. Compared to most other painful conditions, pain in SCD is unique
because of the unpredictable and recurrent episodes of acute pain due to vaso-occlusive crises, in addition to
chronic pain which continuously affects the majority of individuals. Pain in SCD can start during infancy and
continue throughout life. Guided by an unmet need to address the morbidity associated with pain in SCD, our
network is committed to profoundly impacting the science of sickle cell pain through leading expertise in pain,
SCD pathobiology, end-organ damage and integrative interventions, assisted by cutting-edge technological
advancement through 3 specific aims: [#1] “Science without borders.” To develop a collaborative network of
multidisciplinary scientists, clinicians, analysts, and community partners to advance the understanding of SCD
pain mechanisms; [#2] “Promoting the future” for innovative, technically advanced, multidimensional,
multidisciplinary and holistic team science approaches; and [#3] “Hub to health,” multimodal dissemination
efforts to maximize access to SCDPAIN. To achieve these goals, we will establish 6 focused working groups
on, priority areas, pilot funding, sabbatical review, network foresight and review, annual review, and promotion
of diversity and equity. We propose 3 critical priority areas, [i] to determine the central mechanisms involved in
the persistence of pain and opioid use in SCD, [ii] study “interoception of sickle pain perception” and/or
improve SCD pain responses in the brain and other organs within animals and humans, and [iii] examine
chronic and acute pain and downstream complications and treatment side-effects requiring whole-person
approaches. Finally, we will maximize access to SCDPAIN via multimodal dissemination efforts to propel
scientific advancements in SCD. The MPI team has extensive experience in propelling SCD pain research
forward, bringing multidisciplinary teams together, and mentoring the next generation of pain scientists. In
addition, a team of 9 collaborators bring extensive, diverse and cutting-edge technology which will lead
research into a new era of mechanism-based translational understanding of sickle cell pain. Their passion for
successful mentoring and promoting diversity is poised to provide a continuum of success to the network. The
impact of SCDPAIN will be monumental in: [1] Building multidisciplinary research capacity to fulfill critical
unmet needs of SCD pain; [2] Incentivizing novel initiatives through Pilot funds leading to R-series, HEAL and
related Grants and [3] Catalyzing the future generation of scientists to accelerate SCD pain research.
SCDPAIN will lead to a transformative framework and excite experts and novice researchers for mechanism-
based, whole-person understanding of SCD pain mechanisms.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Duke-Utah HEAL KIDS Pain Resource and Data Center
Project Number: 1U24HD116261-01

Abstract:
PROJECT SUMMARY/ABSTRACT
Thousands of children in the United States receive treatment for acute pain each year, and even more
experience pain that is unrecognized. The majority of those who are treated receive interventions that have not
been proven to be safe or effective in children. Inadequately treated acute pain can lead to chronic pain and
multiple adverse outcomes. Rigorous trials performed under a structured research and data ecosystem that
address acute pediatric pain are urgently needed. To address this critical, unmet public health need, we will
establish the Duke-Utah HEAL Kids Pain Resource and Data Center (Duke-Utah RDC). Our RDC will support
multi-site clinical trials within the HEAL KIDS Acute Pain Clinical Trials (APCT) with the overarching goal of
harmonizing these trials in an integrated program with shared objectives, procedures, and tools to maximize
knowledge gained in pediatric pain. The Duke University Clinical Research Institute (DCRI) and The University
of Utah, two powerhouses in clinical trial and data coordination with an established history of collaboration, are
uniquely positioned to establish this RDC. We will leverage the capacity and experience of the world’s largest
academic research organization, DCRI, and the pediatric trial and informatics expertise of the Utah DCC to
integrate high-quality logistics and operations, experienced communications management, and sophisticated
data and informatics solutions for the HEAL KIDS program. The faculty on our proposal, who include
pediatricians with subspecialty expertise (Greenberg, Benjamin, Watt) and experts in informatics (Sward), will
provide coordination, support, and consultation to HEAL KIDS program investigators and trial data coordinating
centers, building their capacity to implement well-designed, efficient trials that produce high-quality, easily
accessible data. To achieve this vision, we will establish 2 RDC cores: 1) a Data Curation and Harmonization
Core; and 2) an Administrative and Communications Core. These cores will engage proactively with the ACPT
trial teams, data coordinating centers, NIH, and other stakeholders to accomplish the following specific aims: 1)
Create and sustain a harmonized HEAL KIDS Pain research and data ecosystem; 2) Facilitate compliant data
sharing and seamless accessibility to maximize future research; and 3) Support effective communication within
the program and to the broader research community. Our HEAL KIDS Pain research and data ecosystem will
lay the foundation for the generation of harmonized data. We will ensure that these data are submitted to
public use repositories and easily accessible to investigators through the use of sophisticated informatics tools.
The Duke-Utah RDC will fuel the successful completion of the awarded APCT trials while maximizing the
impact of the resulting data to ensure forward progress in the management of pediatric pain conditions. Our
infrastructure will serve as a model and foundation for future pediatric pain trials.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Epigenetic Drivers of Chronic Low Back Pain
Project Number: 1R01AR083365-01A1

Abstract:
PROJECT SUMMARY / ABSTRACT
Chronic Low Back Pain (LBP) is a leading cause of disability worldwide and one of the most common
reasons patients are prescribed opioids, despite their poor ability to improve function. LBP threatens our
economic health due to high rates of health care utilization and disability, our security due to high rates of
medical discharge from armed services, and our quality of life due to pain-related suffering, pain-associ-
ated opioid misuse, depression, and anxiety. The primary driver in 40% of all LBP cases is estimated to
be pain resulting from intervertebral disc (IVD) degeneration, referred to as discogenic LBP. Improved
understanding of this degenerative process is needed to address this global problem. Epigenetic mecha-
nisms, such as DNA methylation, dynamically regulate gene expression in response to local, systemic
and environmental influences. However, very little is known about the role of DNA methylation in dis-
cogenic LBP. This application will address this knowledge gap by determining the role of DNA methyla-
tion in the pathological expression of genes involved in IVD degeneration and discogenic LBP.
Our central hypothesis is that widespread and persistent reprogramming of gene expression by DNA
methylation drives IVD degeneration and can be targeted for the treatment of discogenic LBP. Since
DNA methylation is potentially a mechanism underlying the chronicity of pain, elucidation of the role of
DNA methylation in IVD degeneration is likely to provide a strong scientific framework for innovative new
treatment approaches for discogenic LBP. In Aim 1 we will identify the DNA methylation and gene ex-
pression landscape of IVD degeneration and discogenic LBP in humans. In Aim 2, we will identify the
DNA methylation and gene expression landscape of IVD degeneration and discogenic LBP in animal
models and delineate correlated DNA methylation and gene expression profiles. In Aim 3, we will explore
the role of DNA methylation on IVD degeneration and discogenic LBP in animal models by manipulating
methylation using non-pharmacological (home cage voluntary running wheels) and pharmacological in-
terventions.
These results will be significant because scientific evidence of a role for epigenetic reprogramming in IVD
degeneration and discogenic LBP may contribute to a paradigm shift in understanding, prevention, and
treatment of chronic LBP.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Development of a Tailored Alcohol Screening, Brief Intervention, and Referral to Treatment Protocol for Older Adults with Chronic Pain
Project Number: 1K23AG088376-01

Abstract:
PROJECT SUMMARY/ABSTRACT
 Hazardous alcohol use is highly prevalent among the millions of older adults who have chronic pain.
This is alarming, given that hazardous drinking can exacerbate chronic pain and associated health risks and
interfere with pain treatment. Therefore, it is imperative to identify and intervene upon hazardous drinking in
older adults with chronic pain. Alcohol screening, brief intervention, and referral to treatment (A-SBIRT)
reduces hazardous drinking and is a promising approach to delivering early alcohol intervention within medical
settings. However, to meet the unique needs of older adults with chronic pain, A-SBIRT content needs to be
tailored to account for: salient consequences of drinking in older adults with chronic pain, including the effects
of alcohol use on pain and associated outcomes; pain as a barrier to alcohol reduction, given that older adults
frequently report drinking to cope with pain; and multimorbidity, use of opioid analgesics, and polypharmacy, all
of which are highly prevalent in older adults with chronic pain. The current lack of an A-SBIRT that is
specifically tailored for the millions of older adults with chronic pain represents a major gap in research and
clinical care. Therefore, the goal of this study is to develop, refine, and pilot test an alcohol screening, brief
intervention, and referral to treatment protocol that is tailored for older adults with chronic pain (A-SBIRT-GCP).
Our guiding hypothesis is that tailoring the protocol to meet the unique needs of older adults with chronic pain
will increase motivation/self-efficacy to reduce drinking, decrease hazardous alcohol use, and, consequently,
improve chronic pain and important aging-related outcomes. In the proposed Stage 1 work, we will: 1) develop
A-SBIRT-GCP with clinician and patient stakeholder input; 2) refine A-SBIRT-GCP using a mixed methods
open pilot trial; and 3) evaluate the feasibility and acceptability of A-SBIRT-GCP in a pilot RCT. Findings from
this K23 project will inform a subsequent application for R01-level funding to conduct a Stage 2 RCT testing
the efficacy of A-SBIRT-GCP in reducing hazardous drinking and consequently improving pain and aging-
related outcomes (e.g., physical and cognitive function, quality of life) among older adults with chronic pain. If
efficacious, A-SBIRT-GCP offers great potential to be an affordable, scalable, and efficient intervention.
 The proposed work builds on the applicant’s background as a clinical psychologist with unique
expertise in chronic pain and addiction and will provide advanced mentored training in: 1) the use of qualitative
and mixed methods research; 2) the conduct of clinical trials; and 3) gerontological research. The applicant has
a multidisciplinary mentorship team of experts who are uniquely well-suited to oversee the proposed research
and training aims. In addition, the rich institutional environment at Massachusetts General Hospital and
Harvard Medical School will support the applicant in the successful completion of this project. The advanced
training and preliminary data obtained through the proposed project will propel the applicant’s transition toward
an independent, externally funded, productive gerontological research career.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Validating SER-014, a TRPV1 antagonist, to treat endometriosis
Project Number: 1R41HD115418-01

Abstract:
Validating SER-014, a TRPV1 antagonist, to treat endometriosis
Summary
 Endometriosis is a chronic inflammatory condition that affects ~10% of women and often results in debilitating
pain. The disease is characterized by lesions consisting of endometrium-like tissue infiltrated with inflammatory
cells, nerves, etc. In addition to local pain and irritation, lesions often lead to peripheral sensitization, including
TRPV1 upregulation. The disease is most commonly treated with NSAIDs, with hormonal manipulation (steroid
hormones and GNRH receptor modulators), and with surgery to remove lesions. Approximately 30% of patients
are not effectively treated by any of these options and endometriosis-associated pain is an important driver of
opioid use in women. There are no guidelines for the use of opioids in gynecologic pain, and endometriosis
patients can find themselves dependent upon opioids without substantial symptom relief. Endometriosis
increases the likelihood of chronic opioid use, opioid dependence/abuse, and opioid overdose.
 Serentrix LLC is a biotech company invested in the development of new, non-addictive therapies for pain.
Our lead compound, SER-014 (previously called PHE377 that we acquired from PharmEste), is a transient
receptor potential cation channel subfamily V member 1 (TRPV1) receptor antagonist that has been tested in
Phase 1 trials in healthy human subjects. Because TRPV1 is a key channel that mediates pain and inflammation
in endometriosis, our goal is to develop SER-014 as a novel small molecule TRPV1 antagonist for the treatment
of endometriosis as detailed below in our aims.
 Serentrix is collaborating with Dr. Michael Rogers at Children’s Hospital at Harvard Medical School, an expert
in endometriosis research, who has developed and validated a best-in-class mouse model of disease, and Dr.
Megan Falsetta at the University of Rochester Medical Center, an expert in genitopelvic pain research with
extensive experience in the measurement of calcium signaling. Together, we will test SER-014 in this validated
endometriosis model and confirm that it’s mode of action is specific to inhibiting the response to TRPV1 agonists
(e.g., capsaicin), while not dysregulating thermal responses. SER-014, unlike many failed TRPV1 antagonists
does not cause hyperthermia in animals or humans; we will show this is due to its mechanistic specificity.
Aim1: Measure the efficacy of SER-014 against endometriosis-associated pain and lesion size in a
validated mouse model. This will demonstrate the extent to which blood levels achieved by safe doses of SER-
014 can alleviate pain and reduce lesions. In alignment with this HEAL initaitive RFA, we will confirm its efficacy
as a novel, safe, non-addictive treatment for endometriosis, a lifelong condition that destroys quality of life.
Aim 2: Confirm the molecular mechanism through which SER-014 impedes TRPV1 activity without
inducing hyperthermia. This will ascertain that SER-014 is ready to be tested in human studies and is devoid
of side effects that were commonly associated with other TRPV1 receptor antagonists.
 Since SER-014 has already been tested in a Phase 1 clinical trial, our goal is to generate evidence
sufficient to derisk a Phase 2 clinical trial seeking evidence of efficacy in endometriosis.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Investigating the Pathogenic Role of Tubulin Post-translational Modifications in CIPN
Project Number: 1R01CA279401-01A1

Abstract:
SUMMARY
 Chemotherapy induced peripheral neuropathy (CIPN) is the most prevalent neurological complication of
oral or intravenous chemotherapy. Approximately 50–90% of patients under chemotherapy are affected by CIPN
and bear a high risk of chronicity (approx. 30–40%). Limited symptomatic relief is provided by opioid analgesics,
antidepressants, or anticonvulsants. Unfortunately, the pathogenesis of CIPN is still largely unknown. Several
different classes of anticancer drugs acting through different antineoplastic mechanisms can induce CIPN.
However, sensory impairment is always either the only or predominant adverse effect, suggesting the existence
of a common mechanism of pathogenesis.
 Tubulin is the building block of microtubules and a well-established target for multiple anticancer drugs
that can promote CIPN. The contribution of tubulin changes to the onset of CIPN is not well understood but is
strongly implicated as the determining factor. Tubulin and microtubules play crucial roles in sensory neuronal
functions including the distribution of cargos to distal regions of the nerve, TRP channel activity and regulation
of mitochondrial dynamics.
 The overall hypothesis of this proposal is that CIPN-promoting drugs may share an underlying
mechanism of pathogenesis based on modulation of tubulin post-translational modifications at a prodromal stage
of the disease. We will further evaluate whether accumulation of delta-2 tubulin, an irreversible modification of
a-tubulin, which we recently found to mediate axonal degeneration by the anti-cancer drug bortezomib, plays a
common pathogenic role in the neuropathic damage inflicted by unrelated CIPN-promoting drugs. Finally, we
will examine the contribution of mitochondrial and TRP channel dysfunction in the axonopathy induced by
accumulation of D2 in DRG neurons.
 Our proposal is based on our published data and the development of robust cellular and preclinical
models of CIPN generated by an ongoing collaboration between the PI and Dr. Yalda Moayedi, a co-investigator
on this application. Collectively, our studies will provide mechanistic insights into a unifying model of
pathogenesis for the development of CIPN based on tubulin modifications and will directly examine the
unexplored potential for tubulin-modifying enzymes in drug therapies aimed at preventing axonal injury and
neuropathic pain in CIPN. They will also pave the way to analyze the pathogenic role of modified tubulin in the
onset of other chemotherapy-related adverse sequelae such as nephrotoxicity or ototoxicity as well as idiopathic
or inherited forms of peripheral neuropathy in addition to CIPN.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: A Novel Aerosolization and Inhalation Platform for the Pulmonary Delivery of Anti-inflammatory Agents to Distal Airways for the Enhanced Pain Management in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD)
Project Number: 1R43HL172316-01

Abstract:
Project Summary/Abstract
Treating inflammation in deep lung would help manage pain in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD),
as pain in COPD patients is often associated with the prolonged induction of painful stimuli from the hard-to-
reach inflammations in distal airways. Current guidelines recommend pulmonary delivery of anti-inflammatory
agents to treat COPD inflammations. However, existing nebulizer and inhalation technologies suffer from several
disadvantages including low pulmonary delivery efficiencies, hard-to-use hand-breath coordination, and the lack
of a point-of-care monitoring and dose control system of inhaled medicine for individualized treatment.
We have developed an inhalation device prototype for dose-controlled pulmonary delivery of medicines into the
deep lung. The device utilizes a novel atomizer with a “bottom-up” aerosolization technology that generates
aerosols with optimized particle sizes. Preliminary data shows that anti-inflammatory drugs (ibuprofen) can be
aerosolized with optimized particle sizes (MMAD < 2 µm) for delivery to small distal airways. No detectable
impurities were found in aerosolized molecules and deposited aerosols yielded a significant reduction of pro-
inflammatory mucin secretion based on a 3D respiratory cell model (EpiAirway). The inhalation device contains
a built-in chip and algorithms that monitor and provide real-time consumption dosage to users and authorized
physicians. This technology platform has the potential to shift the paradigm from traditional nebulizer and inhaler
strategies for the inflammation and pain treatment in COPD and other inflammatory respiratory diseases.
In Aim 1, we plan to investigate the feasibility of delivering two categories of small anti-inflammatory molecules,
corticosteroids and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), to distal airways using our novel inhalation
device prototype. Our investigation will involve developing formulations that are compatible with the device and
conducting rigorous gravimetric and chemical analyses to quantify the dosage, while establishing the acute
toxicity profile of the aerosolized molecules. We will also systematically adjust the simulated inhalation regimes
based on our collected data to verify the dosage algorithm and estimate the optimal dosage. Lastly, we will
employ established dosimetry models to estimate pulmonary deposition status in simulated human respiratory
tracts, providing insights into the therapeutic potential of our proposed inhalation device prototype.
In Aim 2, we plan to leverage an established inflamed multicellular model to characterize the anti-inflammatory
efficacies. Specifically, we will utilize a 3D respiratory tissue culture model, EpiAlveolar, co-cultured with
monocyte-derived macrophages (MDMs) to mimic the inflammation phenotypes in distal airways of COPD
patients. We will assess the anti-inflammatory reactions, including cytokine and gene expression, with additional
endpoints including membrane barrier integrity and cell viability to determine the acute cytotoxicity of aerosolized
molecules. At the end of SBIR phase I project, we will have collected data on the in vitro feasibility of delivering
anti-inflammatory agents to distal airways, as well as evaluated their efficacy as a proxy for COPD pain reduction.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Sex differences in modulating HIV/SIV reservoirs in the context of opioids
Project Number: 1R01DA061678-01

Abstract:
Abstract
Due to the widespread use of antiretroviral therapy, HIV replication is effectively controlled in infected individuals.
However, viral reservoirs form early post-infection, posing a persistent challenge to complete virus eradication.
It has been suggested that sex differences may influence the establishment of HIV reservoirs, with variations
between women and men attributed to socio-economic and biological factors, a phenomenon further
compounded by opioid use. Established knowledge indicates that women are more susceptible to HIV acquisition
than men due to robust estrogen receptor signaling. Despite this, women tend to exhibit lower viral loads and
more robust antiviral responses than men, potentially contributing to differences in the size of viral reservoirs.
Moreover, opioid abuse remains a significant problem among HIV-infected individuals, with common opioids like
morphine implicated in differentially augmenting SIV/HIV persistence within the Central Nervous System (CNS)
and periphery. The overarching goal of this proposal is to explore the role of sex differences in the establishment
and maintenance of HIV/SIV reservoirs in the context of substance use. Preliminary studies using SIV-infected
rhesus macaques as a model of HIV infection demonstrate that chronic use of morphine modulates SIV
reservoirs differentially. Higher reservoir sizes are observed in CNS-derived microglial cells compared to
peripheral PBMC and lymph nodes in animals exposed to morphine, as opposed to control animals. However,
systematic studies are needed to document these differences comprehensively. To address this question, we
plan to utilize age/sex-matched rhesus macaques and unique reagents prepared in our laboratory. This involves
employing a well-established model of the SIVmac251 virus, which has been previously used to generate
preliminary data, demonstrating efficient replication in both the CNS and periphery. The proposed research aims
to delineate the role of sex factors in seeding and establishing viral reservoirs (Aim 1). Subsequently, we will
determine the location, abundance, and persistence of viral reservoirs in the context of opioid dependence.
Modeling simulations will be performed to understand the differences between establishing reservoirs in males
and females (Aim 2). These studies are expected to reveal whether sex differences play a significant role in
establishing reservoirs in people living with HIV infection (PLWH) in the setting of opioid usage. This information
will be valuable for designing effective HIV cure strategies.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Transforming mental health care via science-based, personalizable and scalable digital therapeutics
Project Number: 1R43MH138155-01

Abstract:
Project Summary_Abstract
 Mental health problems are increasing worldwide; however, the vast majority of people struggling with
mental health challenges do not receive any treatment and the mental health workforce is woefully insufficient
to meet our population-level needs. Digital Therapeutics (DTx) are optimally positioned to tackle these
challenges and transform mental health care. DTx are clinical-grade software used to prevent, treat, or
manage a medical disorder or disease. DTx can have a major impact on health costs, health behavior, and
health outcomes. For example, DTx can effectively treat depression, anxiety, ADHD, panic disorder and eating
disorders, among many other mental health conditions. And, they are associated with marked reductions in ED
visits, inpatient utilization, and net costs, and increases in medication adherence.
Despite their impressive clinical value, several challenges persist in fully realizing the potential of DTx
to improve people’s lives globally. First, the pace at which DTx are developed, tested, and commercialized is
slow. Second, many development activities are redundant across projects. Third, due to budget, time and
capacity constraints, many scientists develop prototypes of DTx that can be used in research but which are not
built to scale for large numbers of users. Finally, most DTx cannot be readily modified for various populations
critical for advancing digital health equity (adapted to culture, language, race, ethnicity, sexual orientation).
 Based on over two decades of NIH-supported work developing, evaluating and commercializing DTx, we
have developed a unique DTx platform (Laddr) which integrates science-based, therapeutic processes to
address a wide range of behavioral problems within a single digital platform. This platform offers the potential
to revolutionize digital health - as it provides a scalable model for delivering DTx to treat any disorder with a
behavioral component. We now plan to make an editable version of Laddr (called Cogito) commercially
available to developers of DTx. Cogito will provide a turnkey solution for rapidly developing, evaluating,
deploying, and scaling DTx for the prevention, treatment and/or management of any disease or disorder - via a
drag and drop interface with no programming necessary.
 In this Phase 1 SBIR application, we will finalize several features of the Cogito platform to increase its
commercial potential as a turnkey platform for developing and hosting DTx. And we will assess the feasibility,
technical merit, and commercial potential of the Cogito DTx platform via usability testing with clinical
researchers. We will focus on the usability of Cogito with researchers in the mental health field in this initial
phase and then expand to a broad clinical research community focused on the prevention, treatment, or
management of various health conditions in future iterations of this work.
to markedly accelerate the pace and impact of science based DTx.
Overall, Cogito offers great promise

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: A novel oral immunotherapy for chronic visceral pain of irritable bowel syndrome
Project Number: 1UG3NS135350-01A1

Abstract:
Abstract:
Chronic visceral pain is a defining feature of irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) that is currently considered as a
disorder of brain-gut interaction. Although pain is the most common driver of healthcare visits for IBS
patients, the current treatment options are often ineffective and associated with side effects. The use of
potent opioids for visceral pain has been reported to be associated with higher morbidity and mortality than
other pain conditions and contribute to the opioid epidemic. Although the etiology of IBS is not clearly
understood, the current studies indicate that neuroinflammation in gastrointestinal tract plays a critical role in
the pathogenesis of visceral pain. Gut inflammatory mediators modulate the intestinal nerve system, leading
to long-lasting functional alterations after resolution of the inflammatory insult. Among inflammatory
mediators, tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) is a “master regulator” and found to be implicated in both
peripheral and central sensitization during pain induction in preclinical pain models and significantly elevated
in some IBS patients especially patients with post-infection/inflammation IBS. This preclinical and clinical
evidence supports the development of therapeutics targeting gut TNF-α for the treatment of IBS pain.
Fzata has developed a novel oral biotherapeutic, FZ006, an engineered probiotic yeast Saccharomyces
boulardii that secretes a neutralizing antibody against TNF-α. We demonstrated that oral FZ006 delivers anti-
TNF to gut and exhibited exceptional efficacy on relieving visceral pain in several animal models. To develop
FZ006 as a safe, non-addictive, first-in-class, oral therapeutic to treat chronic visceral pain, we propose the
UG3/UH3 plan with the final aim of an IND submission requesting clearance for phase I clinical trials.
Specifically, in the UG3 phase, we will determine the effective dose range of FZ006 and validate therapeutic
efficacy in humanized mice; perform small-scale manufacturing and generate a well-characterized research
cell bank; and prepare and submit pre-IND meeting request with the FDA. In the UH3 phase, we will
manufacture FZ006 under GMP to generate drug substance and drug product for clinical trials; perform
stability assessment and GLP toxicology studies; plan for first-in-human trial; and finally submit IND application
to the FDA for approval. Our ultimate goal is to develop FZ006 as an effective, safe, convenient, and non-
addictive oral therapeutic to treat chronic visceral pain in IBS patients.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Stigmatizing Language in Cancer Care Electronic Health Records
Project Number: 1F30MD019959-01

Abstract:
PROJECT SUMMARY/ABSTRACT
Healthcare and research organizations, including the American Society for Clinical Oncology, acknowledge the
common use of stigmatizing language in cancer care. However, stigmatizing language has not been
comprehensively defined, and drivers and outcomes of this language use have not been investigated in cancer
care. One way that discrimination and stigma manifest in the healthcare system is through the electronic health
record (EHR), which can reflect the author’s implicit and explicit bias. Reading stigmatizing language alters
readers’ clinical decisions in vignette studies. Thus, there is an opportunity to evaluate EHR stigmatizing
language as a modifiable mechanism of decreasing discrimination and improving outcomes in cancer care.
The long-term goal is to evaluate sociocultural and healthcare system influences of EHR stigmatizing language
and resulting changes in clinical decision-making in cancer care. The central hypothesis is that stigmatizing
language is present in the cancer care EHR, inequitably experienced, and associated with altered clinical
decision-making. The hypothesis will be tested via the following specific aims: (1) Determine the categories of
stigmatizing language used by oncology clinicians when documenting patient encounters in the EHR; (2)
Compare stigmatizing language in the cancer care EHR by patient and clinician characteristics; (3) Determine
if stigmatizing language use is associated with disparities in medication prescription for cancer-related pain.
This study will leverage EHR data from a large academic and community healthcare system in Minnesota. Aim
1 utilizes a qualitative study design to perform a directed content analysis of the unstructured, free text section
of outpatient oncology EHR notes. Aims 2 & 3 use natural language processing to abstract stigmatizing terms
and phrases for each individual with outpatient cancer visits in 2022. Multilevel models will be utilized to
account for nested visit-level data within patient-level data within clinician-level data. This project is innovative
in its characterization and modeling of stigmatizing language in cancer care and will have significant impact by
informing interventions to reduce stigma, health disparities, and resulting negative health outcomes. By
focusing on EHR stigmatizing language, this project addresses emerging opportunities and challenges as
medical records become accessible to patients and persist throughout their lives. The applicant is an MD/PhD
and Epidemiology PhD student at the University of Minnesota Schools of Medicine and Public Health. By
expanding content knowledge in cancer survivorship and disparities, rigorous qualitative and quantitative
analysis skills, tailored clinical training, and focused professional development opportunities, this fellowship will
enhance her ability to excel in the MD/PhD program and become an independent academic physician-
epidemiologist.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Building iCRISP: Indigenous Community-Informed Research Infrastructure to address Substance Misuse and Pain Management
Project Number: 1OT2DA061140-01

Abstract:
The Lumbee tribe of North Carolina is a state-recognized tribe of approximately 60,000 enrolled
members, making it the largest American Indian tribe in the eastern United States and one of the largest tribes in the nation. The tribal homeland for the Lumbee tribe is situated in Robeson County, a rural county in southeastern North Carolina that ranks last among North Carolina’s 100 counties in health outcomes and is adversely impacted by social determinants of health. For the past ten years, tribal leadership has been working with universities and community agencies to better understand the health of tribal members; but to date there has been no intentional effort to develop a comprehensive research infrastructure. Data from the North Carolina Division of Health and Human Services Injury and Violence Prevention Branch indicate that American Indians in North Carolina have the highest rates of substance misuse deaths and emergency room visits of all the racial/ethnic groups in the state. North Carolina’s American Indian population consists of eight recognized tribes, only one of which, the Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians, is federally recognized with access to resources from the Indian Health Services. This proposed 2-year planning initiative, led by the Lumbee Tribe, brings together an internationally recognized community relief organization (CORE), a state agency focused on substance misuse epidemiology and prevention (NC DHHS IVP) and five research organizations with national and
international reputation in community-based participatory research, substance misuse prevention research and policy development and implementation (UNC DPOP, UNC IPRC, RTI, WFU, UNCP). Our overall objective is to create the research infrastructure to develop and implement evidence-based, community-informed and culturally-appropriate interventions to address the substance misuse epidemic in the Lumbee tribe. Our team will draw on previous substance misuse programming in the Lumbee community to respond to this epidemic, as well as prior efforts to understand the health challenges in tribal communities, including the Native Pathways to Health and the State and Tribal Injury Data Sharing Summit in 2019. Our Specific Aims include: (1) Development of a Substance Misuse Research and Community Advisory Committees from representatives of the Lumbee community and from our five research organizations, with the goal of developing community-driven action research strategies to understand and address substance misuse; (2) Creation of a Lumbee Substance Misuse Data Dashboard and Storyboard to understand the epidemiology of substance misuse and community impact of substance misuse in the Lumbee tribe and identify key driving factors; (3) Formulation of a research training
protocol for Lumbee tribal members and ally representatives to evaluation evidence-based interventions currently implemented in the community and programming needs; (4) Laying the groundwork for an indigenous-informed cultural adaptation of an evidence-based pain management intervention to be pilot-tested among Lumbee patients experiencing chronic pain. At the end of this funding, we anticipate being well positioned to have a strong research infrastructure to understand and address substance misuse disparities in the Lumbee community.
This study is part of the NIH’s Helping to End Addiction Long-term (HEAL) initiative to speed scientific solutions for the overdose epidemic, including opioid and stimulant use disorders, and the crisis of chronic pain. The NIH HEAL Initiative bolsters research across NIH to improve treatment for opioid misuse and addiction and acute and chronic pain.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Promoting Community Wellbeing Through Indigenous Science and Healing
Project Number: 1OT2DA061134-01

Abstract:
ABSTRACT
 American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) communities have been disproportionately negatively
impacted by opioid and stimulant drugs, health conditions that cause chronic pain, and related problems such
as trauma, suicide, and alcohol use. These problems are caused by settler colonialism. Therefore, AI/AN
communities are best positioned to understand and overcome these challenges using cultural strengths and
protective factors. Too often research is driven by funder priorities and led by non-community researchers rather
than centered on community objectives and led by local research teams. Thus, AI/AN people may not experience
sustained health benefits or have the opportunity to develop and strengthen their own research expertise and
infrastructure. In response to the opioid epidemic that is disproportionately harming Native people and calls by
AI/AN leaders to support communities in implementing their own solutions, the National Institutes of Health (NIH)
invites Tribes and Native American Serving Organizations (T/NASOs) and alley organizations to form The Native
Collective Research Effort to Enhance Wellness (N CREW). The objectives of N CREW are to support T/NASOs
to conduct community prioritized research, grow their infrastructure, and improve the quality of relevant data for
local decision-making. With the support of N CREW, T/NASOs will conduct research and data improvement
projects to promote wellbeing and healing from the effects of opioid and stimulant drugs, pain, and related
problems, such as suicide, alcohol use, and historical trauma.
 We will form a key component of the N CREW Native Research Resource Network (NRRN) entitled,
“Promoting Community Wellbeing Through Indigenous Science and Healing (PC-WISH).” PC-WISH will partner
with other NRRN members to support T/NASOs as they develop and pilot research and data improvement
projects. PC-WISH is led by a Multiple Principal Investigator team of three Native Investigators (Abigail Echo-
Hawk, Kamilla Venner, Stacy Rasmus), and a non-Native researcher (Michael McDonell), who together have
over 50 years of experience leading or partnering with T/NASOs, and a productive history of collaboration with
one another. Our team has expertise in research on culturally grounded and adapted prevention, harm reduction,
treatment, and recovery interventions for opioids, stimulants, pain, and other problems, as well as leaders in
Indigenous data improvement frameworks and research with Urban Indian people.
 PC-WISH is rooted in the understanding that Indigenous Knowledge is the basis for healing in AI/AN
communities. We propose an Indigenous Research and Evaluation Partnership Model based on the metaphor
of the seasons of the harvest. Using this model and guided by the principles of Tribal and Community Based
Participatory Research, we propose the following aims. We will listen and learn from communities to understand
their research and data improvement strengths and resource needs. We will host InterTribal Cafés in the first
two quarters of the project to learn and document research readiness. We will use this information to create
Partnership Plans that will guide our supports and develop blueprints in collaboration with T/NASOs to guide
their formative work. We will develop, implement, and refine research trainings, tools, and knowledge exchange
opportunities (e.g., workgroups, ongoing consultation) to support the growth of T/NASO research capacity. We
will lead and engage in activities that establish, strengthen, and maintain partnerships, as reciprocal
communication is the foundation of effective collaboration. We will evaluate our activities by using the Indigenous
Evaluation Framework and host InterTribal Cafés at the end of Phase 1. We will use this feedback to reflect on
lessons learned in preparation for Phase 2 of N CREW. We will create a dissemination and resource website to
share lessons learned and serve as a resource to T/NASOs in the second phase of this important project. We
will partner with T/NASOs to disseminate relevant information to their communities and the field. We will also co-
lead cross-N CREW activities in collaboration with other NRRN members.
 Our work will be impactful because we have a track record of long-term sustained partnerships with Rural
and Urban T/NASOs to design, implement, and disseminate intervention research and data improvement
projects. We will use culturally grounded or adapted approaches to develop, implement, evaluate, and
disseminate our work. Our application is innovative because we have expertise that spans the prevention, harm
reduction, treatment, and recovery spectrum. We also have extensive research partnership experience in co-
developing interventions grounded in local Indigenous Knowledge and culturally adapting evidence based
approaches. Further, we can support T/NASOs who may want to develop and pilot multilevel strengths based
interventions (individual, family, community), or interventions across the lifespan. PC-WISH has strong AI/AN
leadership and representation and includes the only National Tribal Epidemiology Center that is focused on
supporting Urban Indian communities. We will utilize innovative, culturally responsive methods to support
T/NASOs in reaching their milestones, coordinate with NRRN partners, and refine our efforts so we are prepared
to support the expansion of N CREW research in Phase 2 and beyond.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: The potential benefits of autophagy activator TFEB in opioid use disorder in mice
Project Number: 1R21DA060111-01

Abstract:
PROJECT SUMMARY
In the United States, the prevalence of opioid use and opioid use disorder (OUD) more than doubled in recent
years. There has been an increase in opioid-related overdose deaths with nearly 92,000 reported in 2020. This
has led to an unprecedented current crisis of OUD and overdose deaths resulting from indiscriminate use of
opiates. While opioids are potent analgesics and provide relief from pain, they are also prone to be addictive.
This crisis is further worsened due to the availability of illicit and more potent synthetic opiates like Fentanyl.
The current FDA-approved drugs for OUD are both inadequate and have adverse effects. Therefore novel
mechanism-based drug discovery approaches are urgently required for OUD and also to prevent overdose
deaths resulting from respiratory depression.
 The heritability of substance use disorder is estimated to be greater than 50% based on twin, family, and
adoption studies, and yet few modulating genes have been evaluated. Mu-opioid receptor (MOR) signaling is
the major pathway responsible for both pain relief and euphoric effects of opioids. It is important to note that
morphine inhibits nuclear translocation of TFEB, a master regulator of the autophagy-lysosome pathway (ALP),
thereby reducing autophagic activity. Interestingly, we also found that MOR is colocalized with TFEB in the
subcellular neuronal membranes, and most importantly also physically interact with each other as shown by
coimmunoprecipitations. Also, opioids induce significant damage to neurons with reduced synaptic plasticity,
and TFEB is known to protect against neurodegeneration in vivo in the brain, especially the dopaminergic
neurons. Even more important, the most frequent cause of overdose death due to opioids is opioid-induced
respiratory depression (OIRD) as well as damage to the lung tissue. Interestingly, TFEB overexpression can
decrease inflammation and mitochondrial damage in the lung tissue thereby protecting against acute lung
injury. Based on this overwhelming evidence we hypothesize that “As a master regulator of ALP, TFEB plays a
pivotal role in the mitigation of opioid tolerance and dependence by enhancing synaptic plasticity in the brain”.
In specific aim 1, we will use SH-SY5Y cells and striatal primary neurons to verify whether TFEB
overexpression or siRNA-mediated knockdown alters morphine-, fentanyl-, DAMGO, and Methadone-induced
MOR desensitization, internalization, and stability. Specific aim 2 is an in vivo study designed to assess
whether TFEB or its activator TPI-132 influences MOR agonist-induced analgesia, dependence, tolerance,
respiratory depression, and withdrawal symptoms using flag-TFEB, TFEB-/- mice and wild-type mice after sub-
chronic exposure to morphine and fentanyl. To increase rigor, we have included two cell types, multiple
opioids, different time points, doses. If TFEB indeed mitigates opioid addiction and tolerance, TPI-132 that can
activate TFEB and autophagy may be developed as novel and excellent therapy for OUD and overdose deaths

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Promoting Wellness among Native Americans in Urban Areas
Project Number: 1OT2DA061065-01

Abstract:
Modified Project Summary/Abstract Section
The Montana Consortium for Urban Indian Health, a non-profit dedicated to technical and educational support for the Urban Indian Organizations (UIOs) and their Centers across Montana, will utilize HEAL Initiative OTA-23-007 funding to implement the research and data improvement project “Promoting Wellness among Native Americans in Urban Areas.” The goal of the project is to support research into opioid use and integrated healing approaches in Urban Indian populations and provide insight into the efficacy of evidence-based and culturally integrated programs for opioid and methamphetamine use disorders and chronic pain in this population. Our project has three specific aims:   
1.	Improve population health surveillance data and clinical data to identify health gaps and disparities among Urban Indian populations in Montana;   
2.	Adapt evidence-informed interventions to address substance use disorders for Urban Indian populations; and   
3.	Pilot culturally adapted interventions and assess their efficacy. 

During the project, the MCUIH team will use multiple research methods to study patterns and disparities in overdose, prescription management, and chronic pain, and research suitable interventions. MCUIH will work with each UIO in Montana to select potential interventions and adapt them to the needs of each organization’s population and service delivery model. Interventions will be identified and adapted to meet the unique needs of Urban Indian populations, with a focus on culturally relevant and holistic healing methodologies. The project team anticipates that interventions could be Community Health Workers, Recovery Residences, Treatment for Individuals who Use Stimulants (TRUST), and pain-management specific interventions. After program selection, MCUIH will work with UIOs to support initial implementation of the chosen interventions. This deliberate approach ensures that the selected interventions are based upon enhanced use of population- and clinic-level data, align with community needs, and can be implemented effectively with confidence from UIOs and the patient populations of each community.   
 
The work by MCUIH and in collaboration with the UIOs in Montanan will help bridge gaps in care delivery and scientific understanding by improving access to data for examining patterns of overdose, prescription management practices, and chronic pain across UIO communities in Aim 1; adapting evidence-based programs for Montana’s 5 UIOs in Aim 2; and pursuing initial implementation by adapting evidence-informed models in Aim 3; and collaborating with other programs across N CREW. Achieving these aims will positively impact the health and well-being of thousands of Native Americans living in urban centers in Montana and across the country.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Development and Implementation of a Community-Led Research Program in the Utah Navajo Health System
Project Number: 1OT2DA061144-01

Abstract:
The Navajo Nation represents the largest Tribal community in the U.S. and experiences high rates of morbidity and mortality attributable to substance use. Rates of alcohol-associated mortality exceed the national rate by more than five times, and specific prevalence rates for substance use disorders (SUDs) such as stimulants and opioids among the Dine (Navajo), while not currently well-defmed, represent a growing concern. Characterizing the burden of SUDs and the responsiveness of healthcare systems to meet that burden within the Dine community is a critical step toward advancing healthcare access, improving healthcare quality, and increasing overall wellness for Dine people. The Utah Navajo Health System is a nonprofit healthcare system in Southeast Utah servicing more than 15,000 patients across seven chapters of the Navajo Nation. As both a Federally Qualified Health Center and Tribal healthcare system, UNHS provides behavioral health care to thousands of Dine patients each year. Over a 23-year period, UNHS has developed a robust composition of behavioral health services, including medication treatment, addiction treatment services, western medicine-based therapy, traditional counseling, sweat lodges, hogans, telepsychiatry, peer support, domestic violence shelters, crisis intervention, and a community wellness program. UNHS' s success has garnered support, collaboration, and partnership from neighboring organizations, including the Navajo Nation, San Juan County Public Health Department, and Navajo Nation. Despite UNHS' s success in clinical care, its ability to assess needs, evaluate performance, and improve care through empirical data and research has been limited. UNHS currently maintains an electronic medical record, data warehouse, and grants manager primarily for operational needs, including data reporting for the Uniform Data System and applying for and processing service grants to support clinical operations. In contrast, UNHS has not previously initiated a research program or applied for NIH
Research funding. Given its unique, influential, and trusted position within the Dine community, UNHS has great potential to be a leader in healthcare evaluation and research-especially for culturally aligned SUD care. UNHS also has a longstanding partnership with the University of Utah that provides an opportunity to develop research by drawing upon the strengths of each organization. Collaboration between UNHS and UU grew out of a shared commitment to serve Tribal communities and represents a close partnership spanning nearly a decade that is focused on improving the lives and wellbeing of the Dine people. As project partners, UNHS and UU will work toward a single overall ob;ective, which is to develop a sustainable, community-led, culturally aligned SUD research infrastructure housed at UNHS that will benefit the Dine community and other Tribal communities by improving healthcare access, quality, and
outcomes. UNHS and UU will achieve requisite preliminary milestones toward that overall objective by (1) conducting a needs assessment among UNHS stakeholders relating to SUD identification, treatment, and research capacity; (2) implementing an SUD research and evaluation program at UNHS, using a model of facilitated implementation; and (3) developing a three-way study cohort of Dine patients with SUDs who (a) receive traditional counseling (b) receive other SUD treatment, and (c) receive no SUD treatment. The aims of the project will be completed in accordance with key guiding principles, including assurance of cultural alignment, a focus on developing inter-organizational and community partnerships, and a plan for
long-term sustainability. As part of the N CREW Program (OTA-23-007), UNHS will build on its history of leadership in Tribal healthcare delivery, unwavering mission to meet the needs of the Dine community, and commitment to partner with organizations who share a similar vision for improving SUD care in Tribal communities.
This study is part of the NIH’s Helping to End Addiction Long-term (HEAL) initiative to speed scientific solutions for the overdose epidemic, including opioid and stimulant use disorders, and the crisis of chronic pain. The NIH HEAL Initiative bolsters research across NIH to improve treatment for opioid misuse and addiction and acute and chronic pain.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: PRomoting Excellence through Pain and Addiction Research Enhancement (PREPARE)
Project Number: 1T90NR021683-01

Abstract:
ABSTRACT
Pain and substance use disorders (SUD) represent arguably the two most prevalent and costly public health
condition in the United States. While vitally important to consider, the intersection of pain and SUD is not just
limited to opioid use/abuse. Patients being treated for SUD (opioid and non-opioid) commonly report chronic
pain, and, in turn, a history of SUD occurs frequently among patients who receive treatment for chronic pain.
Despite the enormous need for new safe and efficacious treatments, the intersection of pain and SUD research
remains a surprisingly underexplored area of inquiry, which has resulted in excessive knowledge gaps and
limited pain treatment options for people with or in recovery from a SUD. To address this unmet need, we have
developed a new postdoctoral training program: the Promoting Excellence through Pain and Addiction Research
Enhancement (PREPARE) T90/R90 Training Program. A defining feature of the PREPARE Program will be an
emphasis on social determinants of health (SDOH) as they relate to chronic pain and SUD clinical research.
SDOH define the conditions in which people are born, grow, live, work, and age, and the inequities in power,
money, and resources that are often responsible for disparities in pain and SUD outcomes across the U.S. Our
overall goal is to develop outstanding independent investigators capable of sustaining productive clinical and
translational research careers addressing the biopsychosocial (emphasis on social) mechanisms underlying
chronic pain and SUD development, and/or designing clinical interventions to relieve pain and ameliorate SUD.
To facilitate progress toward this goal, the PREPARE Program will complete the following. 1. Recruit and train
promising early career investigators (postdoctoral fellows) to conduct mechanistically-based clinical research in
pain and SUD. 2. Implement an integrated training program that will equip trainees with new research skills and
the knowledge to apply these skills to important and unanswered questions regarding pain and SUD. 3. Create
a culture of responsible research conduct and professional excellence to ensure trainees aspire to high
standards of scientific integrity and quality. PREPARE will leverage an excellent infrastructure and collaborative
network at the Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis. We anticipate significant success in
recruiting and training an outstanding and diverse group of trainees during the initial funding cycle. Members of
the training faculty boast excellent track records of research funding and mentoring experience. Prepare requests
support for five postdoctoral trainees (4 T90, 1 R90) from a variety of clinical training backgrounds, each of whom
will work with their multidisciplinary mentoring team to create and implement a tailored independent development
plan as the blueprint for their training. Trainees will achieve their research and career development objectives
through a combination of didactic, research, and professional development activities, and program evaluation
will be ongoing and multimodal. The PREPARE Program is committed to promoting diversity among our trainees,
and the program will provide a training experience that emphasizes excellence in research integrity and ethics.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: PRomoting Excellence through Pain and Addiction Research Enhancement (PREPARE)
Project Number: 1R90NR021799-01

Abstract:
ABSTRACT 
Pain and substance use disorders (SUD) represent arguably the two most prevalent and costly public health 
condition in the United States. While vitally important to consider, the intersection of pain and SUD is not just 
limited to opioid use/abuse. Patients being treated for SUD (opioid and non-opioid) commonly report chronic 
pain, and, in turn, a history of SUD occurs frequently among patients who receive treatment for chronic pain. 
Despite the enormous need for new safe and efficacious treatments, the intersection of pain and SUD research 
remains a surprisingly underexplored area of inquiry, which has resulted in excessive knowledge gaps and 
limited pain treatment options for people with or in recovery from a SUD. To address this unmet need, we have 
developed a new postdoctoral training program: the Promoting Excellence through Pain and Addiction Research 
Enhancement (PREPARE) T90/R90 Training Program. A defining feature of the PREPARE Program will be an 
emphasis on social determinants of health (SDOH) as they relate to chronic pain and SUD clinical research. 
SDOH define the conditions in which people are born, grow, live, work, and age, and the inequities in power, 
money, and resources that are often responsible for disparities in pain and SUD outcomes across the U.S. Our 
overall goal is to develop outstanding independent investigators capable of sustaining productive clinical and 
translational research careers addressing the biopsychosocial (emphasis on social) mechanisms underlying 
chronic pain and SUD development, and/or designing clinical interventions to relieve pain and ameliorate SUD. 
To facilitate progress toward this goal, the PREPARE Program will complete the following. 1. Recruit and train 
promising early career investigators (postdoctoral fellows) to conduct mechanistically-based clinical research in 
pain and SUD. 2. Implement an integrated training program that will equip trainees with new research skills and 
the knowledge to apply these skills to important and unanswered questions regarding pain and SUD. 3. Create 
a culture of responsible research conduct and professional excellence to ensure trainees aspire to high 
standards of scientific integrity and quality. PREPARE will leverage an excellent infrastructure and collaborative 
network at the Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis. We anticipate significant success in 
recruiting and training an outstanding and diverse group of trainees during the initial funding cycle. Members of 
the training faculty boast excellent track records of research funding and mentoring experience. Prepare requests 
support for five postdoctoral trainees (4 T90, 1 R90) from a variety of clinical training backgrounds, each of whom 
will work with their multidisciplinary mentoring team to create and implement a tailored independent development 
plan as the blueprint for their training. Trainees will achieve their research and career development objectives 
through a combination of didactic, research, and professional development activities, and program evaluation 
will be ongoing and multimodal. The PREPARE Program is committed to promoting diversity among our trainees, 
and the program will provide a training experience that emphasizes excellence in research integrity and ethics.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Trans-synaptic control of GPCR signaling in opioid reward
Project Number: 1R01DA056414-01A1

Abstract:
PROJECT SUMMARY
 Opioids exert their addictive effects by altering signal processing in the reward circuit of the basal ganglia.
This action involves multiple adaptations, including changes in neuronal wiring and synaptic transmission.
Recent evidence suggests that the glutamatergic system plays a critical role in reward. Particularly, group III
metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs) have been recognized for their role in shaping opioid effects
Located at presynaptic terminals of neurons, group III mGluRs control the strength of glutamatergic actions
and synaptic plasticity of the reward circuit. The overall goal of this research is to understand molecular
mechanisms by which opioids alter glutamatergic signaling and wiring of the reward circuit.
 The focus of this proposal is on ELFN1, a recently discovered cell-adhesion molecule which interacts
with group III mGluRs, modulates their function and plays a key role in establishing synaptic connectivity.
ELFN1 is selectively expressed in cholinergic interneurons (CIN) in the reward circuit hub – nucleus
accumbens (NAc) and its ablation in mice prominently influences opioid effects. Based on accumulated
preliminary data, we hypothesize that the trans-synaptic interaction of ELFN1 in CIN with group III mGluRs on
glutamatergic afferents in the NAc plays a critical role in the structural and functional plasticity of synaptic
communication in the reward circuit to shape opioid effects.
 This hypothesis will be tested by pursuing three complementary Specific Aims that seek to (1) elucidate
the physiological role of ELFN1 in specifying synaptic properties of NAc neurons, (2) determine molecular
mechanisms of ELFN1 action and (3) characterize the contribution of ELFN1-mGluR complexes to rewarding
effects of opioids. The strategy proposed to address these Aims will entail a synergistic combination of
behavioral, genetic, cell-biological, and physiological approaches, exploiting a powerful array of reagents,
animal models, and innovative assays to examine role and mechanisms of ELFN1 in the endogenous setting
of a nervous system. Such studies are expected to provide critical insights into the role of synaptic cell
adhesion molecules in configuring neural circuitry and neuromodulatory receptors involved in reward
processing and opioid use disorder.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Oxytocin Neurotransmission Overcomes Sleep Apnea-Related OIRD Hypersensitivity
Project Number: 1R01DA060239-01

Abstract:
This proposal seeks to uncover the biological basis for why sleep apnea patients are more sensitive to opioid-
induced respiratory depression (OIRD) - the primary cause of death due to opioid overdose. Clinically, there
is a pressing need for new therapeutics to counter respiratory depressive effects of opioids without interrupting
their pain-killing actions and without causing unwanted withdrawal effects. We recently discovered that
oxytocin, an analgesic and anxiolytic hormone and neurotransmitter produced in a major apnea-sensitive
respiratory arousal hub, the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus (PVH), can prevent and reverse OIRD
by the most lethal opioid fentanyl. Notably, opioid receptor blockade with Narcan (naloxone, NLX) and
intranasal oxytocin both improve symptoms of obstructive sleep apnea. Our concept is that sleep apnea
patients have deficient oxytocin neurotransmission caused by an excess of endogenous opioids. This would
explain why both blocking opioid receptors and supplementing oxytocin improve sleep apnea symptoms. Our
central hypothesis is that deficient oxytocin neurotransmission from the PVH to respiratory neurons leaves the
respiratory network unable to mount a sufficient ventilatory defense response to effectively combat OIRD. This
oxytocin deficiency is modeled as an adaptive response to sleep apnea that prevents hyperventilation that
would otherwise result from tonic hyperactivity of hypoxia-sensitive carotid body chemoreceptors. Tonic
chemoreceptor activity is a well-recognized response to sleep apnea that contributes to development of
hypertension. Our working model holds that adaptive upregulation of PVH endogenous opioids by sleep apnea
becomes maladaptive when sleep apnea patients take an analgesic or illicit dose of opioid, leading to OIRD
hypersensitivity. According to our model, PVH endogenous opioid upregulation constitutes Hit #1 in a double-
hit scenario. Administration of exogenous opioid (i.e., fentanyl) constitutes Hit #2, triggering exaggerated
OIRD. Specific aims test the extent to which experimental upregulation of PVH endogenous opioids is sufficient
in normoxic mice to mimic OIRD hypersensitivity in mice exposed to our chronic intermittent hypercapnic
hypoxia (CIHH) model of SA. We will also investigate mechanisms whereby oxytocin receptor signaling
occludes the inhibitor action of opioids on respiratory neurons while also testing whether fentanyl CIHH OIRD
hypersensitivity is normalized by PVH opioid receptor blockade, eliminating Hit #1. Studies will further define
the contribution of endogenous PVH opioids in masking sleep apnea-related respiratory hyperdrive and in
blunted oxytocin excitation of respiratory neurons. Opto- and chemogenetic excitation and inhibition studies
will reveal the capacity of acute and prolonged excitation and inhibition of PVH oxytocin neurons to produce
exaggerated OIRD in normoxic mice and mitigate OIRD hypersensitivity in CIHH mice. Findings will yield new
translational information about a powerful oxytocinergic neural circuit previously unknown to opioid
resuscitation research and reveal new targets to prevent sleep apnea related OIRD hypersensitivity.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Training Psychologists and Nurse Practitioners in the Use of an Evidence-Based Online Pain Self-Management Program: Leveraging the Power of Expert Guidance and Telehealth
Project Number: 1R43MH135524-01A1

Abstract:
SUMMARY/ABSTRACT
 Over 100 million adults in the U.S. live with chronic pain. They face risks such as prolonged opioid use,
depression, anxiety, stress, and various social, occupational, and financial problems. Even though opioids
were traditionally used to manage chronic pain, they are no longer the primary option due to their numerous
risks (e.g. overdose, addiction). The CDC and other authorities currently advocate the use of non-opioid
interventions for pain management. Although the shift in policy has successfully decreased opioid
prescriptions, many individuals with pain now encounter a treatment void due to the limited availability of non-
opioid therapies and a shortage of professionals skilled in providing alternative treatments. One promising
solution to these twin dilemmas is the advent of internet-based pain self-management programs. Such
programs have been shown to improve pain-related and mental health outcomes and to reduce prolonged
opioid use. However, some face obstacles in engaging and completing self-directed programs. These
challenges have been shown to diminish when the systematic guidance of trained professionals is available.
 The research team plans to create a Psychologist/Nurse Practitioner-guided version of an existing,
evidence-based online program, the Chronic Pain Management Program (CPMP) to be delivered via
Telehealth. The rigorously tested CPMP has demonstrated significant reductions in opioid use, pain severity,
emotional burden, stress, anxiety, and depression, while concurrently enhancing self-efficacy, coping skills,
and knowledge about chronic pain and its treatment. Despite these successes, the CPMP currently lacks an
option for professional guidance. Consequently, our strategy involves adapting the CPMP's delivery method by
developing a curriculum aimed at training and certifying licensed Clinical/Counseling Psychologists (CPs) and
Nurse Practitioners (NPs) to offer program guidance. This modified format will be integrated into a Telehealth
(virtual) treatment model, broadening the program's availability and accessibility.
The research team will 1) develop Psychologist/Nurse Practitioner Training materials (Aim 1), that align
with the topics and goals of the CPMP and 2) build a web-based Portal (Aim 2) to house the training program,
host profiles of certified CPs/NPs, permit matching of CPs/NPs to adults with chronic pain, provide user access
to the CPMP, and generate automated reports of client program use/progress on the CPMP.
Feasibility will be examined via formative evaluations of the Training materials and the Portal. An iterative
review and product revision process will be carried out by 20 adults with chronic pain and a panel of eight
CPs/NPs. These panels will examine factors such as content, usability, satisfaction, functionality, interest, and
willingness to use. The Goalistics team employed these methods in prior projects to craft a Phase I prototype,
proving its feasibility, technical value, and commercial promise. In Phase II, we aim to formally test the CP/NP
training/certification process and compare the efficacy of the CP/NP-guided CPMP to the self-directed version.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Impact of State Cannabis Laws on Cancer Pain Management and Outcomes: A mixed-methods study
Project Number: 1R37CA291990-01

Abstract:
PROJECT SUMMARY/ABSTRACT
More than one third of the approximately 2 million Americans diagnosed with cancer each year experience
moderate to severe pain related to their disease and/or its treatment. To date, 38 states and the District of
Columbia have adopted medical cannabis laws, and 24 have subsequently adopted adult-use (i.e.,
“recreational”) cannabis use laws, that enable patients with cancer to use cannabis for pain management.
Clinical practice guidelines do not recommend the use of cannabis to manage cancer pain, citing limited and
mixed evidence. Instead, guidelines continue to emphasize opioid therapy as a cornerstone of cancer pain
management. The strength of such consensus varies somewhat across cancer contexts. Consensus on the
appropriateness of opioid therapy is strongest for patients with advanced (i.e., incurable) cancer, especially
those with limited life expectancy. It is also strong for patients undergoing active cancer treatment with curative
intent. In contrast, guidelines for chronic pain management among cancer survivors (i.e., those who have
completed curative treatment and are in remission) reflect an emerging emphasis on opioid-sparing
approaches. Regardless of guideline recommendations, many patients with cancer prefer to limit or avoid
using opioids. In this context and based on prior studies documenting rates of cannabis use exceeding 25%
among patients with cancer, cannabis laws could lead patients to use cannabis in place of opioid therapy, with
downstream effects that are unknown and may differ across cancer contexts. The objective of the proposed
study is to address evidence gaps about the effects of state cannabis laws on pain management practices
(e.g., receipt of opioid therapy) and outcomes (e.g., receipt of treatment for opioid and cannabis use disorder;
patient-reported pain) in cancer. We will conduct a quasi-experimental evaluation of state cannabis laws using
a unique combination of two existing population-based data sources (SEER-Medicare and SEER-MHOS). We
will also collect and analyze survey and interview data to explore how state cannabis laws have influenced
cancer pain management from the perspectives of cancer center leaders, physicians, and patients.
Triangulating results from our policy evaluation with information about cancer center-level implementation of
state cannabis laws, physicians’ practices for recommending, and patients’ practices for using cannabis for
cancer pain will strengthen the validity of observed policy effects. Each year, states consider, enact, and/or
amend cannabis laws. To inform this rapidly evolving policy context, it is essential to understand how these
laws affect pain management for patients with cancer as one of the largest groups of consumers of therapeutic
cannabis. Our proposed study has significant potential to impact policy and practice.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Investigating the role of THC in mediating pain signaling in the BLA
Project Number: 1F31DA061576-01

Abstract:
PROJECT SUMMARY
Chronic pain affects between 40 to 100 million people in the US and managing this pain with opioids has
increased the incidence of opioid substance abuse and death from overdose. There is an urgent and unmet
need for effective chronic pain medications with lower misuse potential. Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) is the
most abundant pharmacological agent found within Cannabis and acts via the endocannabinoid (eCB) signaling
system to produce analgesia. Thirty-eight US states have approved legal medical Cannabis for the
pharmacological treatment of pain and anxiety, alongside recreational use in many cases. However, the precise
neuropharmacological and physiological mechanisms of THC use for pain treatment, and the circuit mechanisms
that underlie the pain-relieving properties of THC are unknown. The basolateral amygdala (BLA) is a critical brain
region important for encoding affective information from incoming stimuli and is a key component in pain
processing. The BLA has increased neuronal activity during chronic pain, and glutamatergic neuronal ensembles
detect and report noxious stimuli to cortical structures that impact pain perception. The BLA has enriched
expression of the receptor sensitive to eCBs and THC, cannabinoid 1 receptor (CB1R). The central hypothesis
of this proposal is that THC acts as a partial agonist at CB1R to decrease excitatory BLA neuronal activity and
pain behaviors during chronic pain. This proposal directly addresses the 2022-2026 NIDA Strategic Plan Goal
1.1 to, “Expand our understanding of the biological mechanisms underlying drug use, addiction, diverse
treatment responses…” and the NINDS 2021-2026 Strategic Plan to“… extend progress in prevention for
neurological diseases beyond stroke, building on basic research advances in epilepsy, TBI, neurodegenerative
diseases, chronic pain...” Aim 1 will determine whether THC acts within the BLA at CB1Rs to alter glutamatergic
neuronal activity to promote analgesia during chronic pain. In this aim, we will multiplex classic
neuropharmacology and dual-color fiber photometry with a machine learning-based behavioral tracking platform
to directly correlate local THC-action and neural activity with naturalistic chronic pain behaviors. We then propose
in Aim 2 to decode how and where THC alters specific BLAglu neuronal ensemble activity during chronic pain.
We will use in vivo 2-photon calcium imaging, a CRISPR site-specific CB1R deletion strategy, and a head-fixed
behavioral paradigm to observe glutamatergic BLA neuronal ensembles during pain. These findings will provide
foundational knowledge informing the cannabinoid, substance abuse, neuropharmacology, and pain fields. For
this proposal, I will gain training and expertise in the use of pharmacological, novel biological and high resolution
computational techniques and learn valuable career development skills through a wide variety of scientific,
intellectual, and mentored opportunities. This F31 proposal is specifically tailored to my personal training needs
and career aspirations that will prepare me for a career as an independent academic neuropharmacologist.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Adding Bright Light Treatment to Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy for Insomnia to Prevent Chronic Post-Surgical Pain in Older Adults
Project Number: 1R01AG085712-01

Abstract:
Preventing Chronic Postsurgical Pain (CPSP) and reducing postsurgical opioid exposure is a public health
imperative. Perioperative insomnia is an increasingly recognized modifiable risk factor for CPSP and opioid
usage, but studies have yet to evaluate whether treating insomnia perioperatively reduces CPSP and opioid
exposure. Insomnia has been linked to central nervous system alterations that contribute to the transition from
acute to chronic pain and is prevalent in at least 50% of older adults with knee osteoarthritis (KOA), awaiting
total knee arthroplasty (TKA). Currently, TKA for end stage KOA is the most common elective surgical
procedure in the US. Rates of CPSP after TKA are high with ~ 20% of individuals reporting moderate to severe
CPSP. Research determining whether optimizing sleep improves TKA outcomes is critical because TKAs are
estimated to increase exponentially to 3.5 million per annum in the next decade. Benzodiazepine receptor
agonists, the most commonly used therapies for insomnia are contraindicated in older adults and especially
dangerous in the context of opioid pain management. Cognitive-behavioral therapy for insomnia (CBTi), is a
safe, well-established treatment for insomnia that improves sleep in chronic pain and has demonstrated small,
but significant effects on pain severity that require enhancement. Emerging data suggests that morning bright
light treatment (MBLT) not only improves circadian rhythms and sleep, it has mood enhancing and analgesic
properties. Although both CBTi and MBLT have distinct mechanisms of action, research on their combination is
just emerging and neither has been used to prevent CPSP or reduce opioid use. We propose a randomized,
controlled, parallel arm, clinical trial, to test the effects of CBTi and CBTi+MBLT on CPSP and opioid sparing
following TKA. Five weeks prior to surgery, TKA patients with insomnia will be randomized to one of 3
conditions matched on timing and contact duration: 1) CBTi+placebo [four pre-surgical telehealth sessions +
two post-TKA boosters (2-week and 3 mo. post TKA)] with 1-hour daily morning deactivated ion generator
sham exposure (placebo) for 4-wks. pre and 4-wks. post-surgery; 2) CBTi+MBLT (1-hour daily morning bright
light treatment for 4-wks. pre and 4-wks. post-surgery), and 3) Education (EDU)+placebo with 1-hour daily
morning deactivated ion generator exposure (4-wks. pre and 4-wks. post-surgery). Outcomes will be assessed
at baseline, post CBT-I (pre-surgery), 6-weeks, 3, and 6-months post-surgery. We have three aims: 1) To
evaluate the effects of perioperative CBTi+placebo and CBTi+MBLT on CPSP [(3-6 mos.) primary] and opioid
use [(6 weeks-6 mos.) 2ndry]; 2) To examine the effects of CBTi+placebo and CBTi+MBLT on pre-surgical,
acute post-surgical (6-weeks), and chronic (3, 6 months) insomnia symptom severity, circadian rest activity
rhythm (RAR), and depressed mood; 3) (exploratory) Evaluate whether the effects of treatment condition on
CPSP and opioid use from 3 to 6 months post-TKA are partially mediated by improvements in insomnia
severity, increases in circadian RAR strength and decreases in depressed mood at 6-weeks post-TKA.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Role of a novel dynorphinergic extended amygdala circuit in pain- and fentanyl abstinence- facilitated alcohol drinking
Project Number: 1F32AA031897-01

Abstract:
PROJECT SUMMARY
Chronic pain is a leading cause of disability worldwide, drastically decreases quality of life, and can drive the
development and maintenance of both alcohol (AUD) and opioid (OUD) use disorders. Both alcohol and opioid
use are reported for pain relief, and co-morbid use of both substances is increasingly common, increasing the
negative effects of either substance used in isolation. Currently, there is limited research, preclinical or clinical,
regarding co-occurring alcohol and opioid use is the context of chronic pain. The kappa opioid receptor (KOR)
and its endogenous ligand dynorphin (DYN) is an endogenous opioid system that is widely expressed throughout
the brain and heavily implicated in alcohol drinking, opioid seeking, and pain chronification. Our lab has recently
identified a novel circuit of nucleus accumbens (NAc) projecting dynorphinergic central amygdala (CeA) neurons
that is modulated by persistent pain and contributes to negative affect. However, this circuit has not been
investigated in alcohol or opioid use. Here, I propose to test the role of DYN CeA-NAc signaling in 1) binge-like
alcohol drinking during persistent pain and protracted fentanyl abstinence, 2) pain avoidance-like behavior and
the effects of alcohol on this behavior, and 3) the effects of binge alcohol on reinstatement of fentanyl seeking
behavior. I will use a combination of behavioral, photometric, and chemogenetic techniques to test the
overarching hypothesis that persistent pain and fentanyl abstinence inhibit a novel dynorphinergic CeA-NAc
circuit to drive binge-like alcohol drinking and subsequent effects on cognitive/motivational pain behaviors and
reinstatement of fentanyl-seeking in a sex-dependent manner. The proposed work will fill a gap in our knowledge
regarding polysubstance use in the context of chronic pain and provide valuable training to a promising young
alcohol neuroscientist.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: α9α10 Nicotinic Acetylcholine Receptors in neuropathic pain
Project Number: 1R01NS134647-01A1

Abstract:
ABSTRACT
Chronic pain represents a serious and growing health concern that affects at least one in five
American adults. Despite the high risk of tolerance, physical dependence, and addiction, opioid
analgesics continue to be a major component of pain management. Furthermore, opioids are only
weakly effective for the approximately 30-40% of chronic pain patients suffering from neuropathic
pain arising from lesions or disease of the somatosensory nervous system. Non-opioid first-line
treatments for neuropathic pain are also only marginally effective and suffer from serious adverse
effects. Clearly, there is an urgent need for new analgesic drug targets and for new classes of
drugs that can effectively and safely treat neuropathic pain. The long-term goal of this research
project is to fill this gap by establishing the role of the α9α10 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor
(nAChR) in neuropathic pain and developing effective antagonists against it. Evidence from
peptidic α9α10 antagonists and α9-knockout mice indicates that inhibition of α9α10 function
successfully attenuates allodynia and hyperalgesia in several animal models of neuropathic pain.
However, the poor drug-like properties of existing α9α10 antagonists hinders them from being
easily translated into the clinic. Previous efforts to discover novel α9α10 ligands have been
thwarted by technical challenges in adapting α9α10 nAChRs for high-throughput screening and
compound optimization assays. Furthermore, the difficulty in expressing α9α10 in mammalian
cells has left unanswered questions regarding the structure and function of this promising drug
target. Building on a recent discovery that TMIE is an essential auxiliary protein for α9α10 receptor
expression, we have engineered a novel HEK293 cell line that stably expresses functional α9α10
receptors. The objective of this application is to leverage this innovative cell line to develop novel
α9α10 antagonists and interrogate the location, function, and structure of the receptor. Moreover,
we will investigate the in vivo efficacy of pharmacological inhibition of α9α10 activity in multiple
neuropathic pain models in mice, studying both spontaneous pain and evoked hypersensitivity.
The results from these studies will provide strong evidence that α9α10 nAChRs play a causal role
in driving neuropathic pain and represent a bona fide target for analgesia, and will deliver
promising lead compounds targeting this mechanism.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Investigating the Feasibility of Combining Mindfulness Intervention and Open-Label Placebo Treatment for Chronic Pain
Project Number: 1R34AT012677-01A1

Abstract:
PROJECT SUMMARY: Chronic pain affects over one third of the U.S. population and is a leading cause of
disability. Hence, there is pressing need for developing innovative, safe, and accessible non-opioid treatments
that effectively alleviate chronic pain. Mindfulness-based therapies (MBTs) have emerged as widely used
mind-body interventions for chronic pain, focusing on enhancing present-moment attention, non-judgmental
awareness, and acceptance. Despite their popularity, the overall effects of MBTs on pain-related outcomes
remain modest. Recent mechanistic studies have shed light on the fact that mindfulness meditation does not
modulate the endogenous opioid system, a crucial player in pain relief. This revelation underscores the
potential for improving the efficacy of an MBT by integrating it with a safe, non-opioid intervention capable of
directly modulating endogenous opioid system. Open-label placebo (OLP), a non-deceptive placebo, presents
a promising, safe, and ethical intervention for chronic pain that can be combined with an MBT. Research has
indicated that placebo-induced analgesia is mediated by the release of endogenous opioids. Consequently,
there is a strong rationale to hypothesize that the combined application of an MBT and OLP treatment may
yield more potent and enduring effects in alleviating chronic pain than either treatment used in isolation. This
R34 study proposes a single-site three-arm randomized-controlled trial to evaluate the feasibility and
acceptability of combining Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction (MBSR), one of the most established and
extensively studied MBTs for chronic pain, with OLP treatment for individuals living with chronic pain. A total of
45 participants will be randomly assigned to one of the following three conditions for an 8-week trial with a 3-
month follow-up period: (1) MBSR-only; (2) OLP-only; and (3) a combination of MBSR and OLP treatment. The
feasibility of conducting the proposed trial will be determined by several metrics, including: (1) the rate of
participant enrollment, (2) participant retention from baseline to 3-month post-treatment follow-up, (3)
adherence to the MBSR program, (3) adherence to OLP treatment monitored using a smart pillbox and the
detection of urinary riboflavin tracer in mid- and post-treatment sessions; and (5) compliance with daily diary
assessments. The acceptability of combining MBSR and OLP treatment will be determined by self-report
ratings regrading (1) treatment satisfaction, (2) intervention effectiveness, (3) intervention convenience, (4)
side effects, (5) appropriateness of intervention and daily diary assessment length and frequency; and (6)
appropriateness of other study measures. The ultimate goal of this study is to advance chronic pain
management strategies for millions of individuals with chronic pain. The proposed study will serve as a pivotal
initial step in establishing procedures and strategies necessary for a comprehensive evaluation of combined
MBSR and OLP treatment in a future fully-powered multi-site clinical trial.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: 2024 ORS/PSRS 7th International Spine Research Symposium
Project Number: 1R13AR084851-01

Abstract:
The Philadelphia Spine Research Society (PSRS) has been conducting annual research meetings since 2004 and
2024 will be the 7th international meeting of the Society in collaboration with the Orthopaedic Research Society
(ORS). This proposal seeks support to promote and enhance attendance by trainees and junior faculty as well as
trainees from Underrepresented minorities (URM) at the 2024 ORS PSRS 7th International Spine Research
Symposium. The Symposium will take place on November 10-14, 2024 at Skytop Lodge, Skytop, PA which is a
convenient location for both the greater Philadelphia and New York regions. The primary purpose of this
conference is to promote state-of-the-art research and to enhance scientific discourse and collaborations in the
broad field of intervertebral disc biology. Previous ORS-PSRS conferences have had an excellent track record of
bringing together researchers and clinicians from broad disciplines at various career stages. The key features of
the symposium include, state-of-the-art invited lectures, peer-reviewed presentations, panel discussions, and
trainee and student presentations. Hallmark features of this conference are its relaxed and informal atmosphere
and purposefully unscheduled time to permit interactions and exchange of ideas among participants. The main
theme of the meeting is “Building Bridges” and topics to be highlighted will include molecular, cell, and
developmental biology of the disc, mechanisms of pathogenesis of disc degeneration, the molecular basis of
discogenic pain, biomechanics of the spine, tissue engineering, device design, rehabilitation and technologies
such as AI and virtual reality. The organizers expect participation from basic researchers as well as clinicians
concerned with the diagnosis and treatment of spinal disorders including disc degeneration and back pain.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Antigen specificity of plasma cells in Hidradenitis suppurativa skin lesions
Project Number: 1R21AI186218-01A1

Abstract:
Project Summary
Hidradenitis suppurativa (HS) is a chronic inflammatory dermatosis that causes recurrent scarring abscesses
and tunnels in the groin, axillae, and perineum. It affects approximately 325,000 Americans, predominantly
women and African Americans. Outside the US, 1% of people from high-income countries suffer from it. HS
causes recurrent scarring abscesses and reduced quality of life. Most patients live with constant pain, and this
leads to chronic opioid use, impaired relationships, and higher suicide risk. Patients with HS are 2-3 times more
likely to commit suicide than the general population, and this association is even stronger among women. There
is one FDA-approved cure, but it is effective only in 50% of those with moderate to severe disease. A better
understanding of HS pathogenesis is needed to develop novel treatment strategies to improve the quality of life
in those living with this devastating disease.
 Epstein Barr Virus (EBV), a ubiquitous gamma herpesvirus is associated with several autoimmune diseases
including Rheumatoid arthritis, Multiple Sclerosis (MS), and Systemic Lupus Erythematosus. A recent
longitudinal study with a large cohort provided strong evidence that EBV is a trigger for autoimmunity by
observing that EBV infection increased the risk of future MS onset by 32-fold. While the mechanisms by which
EBV may trigger autoimmunity are unclear, there is compelling evidence that chronic EBV reactivation and
molecular mimicry between EBV and human proteins are factors.
 Our preliminary data, suggests a link between EBV and HS. In preliminary studies, we compared sera from
HS patients with controls. We found that HS patients make antibodies that are reactive to (a) select epitopes in
EBV and (b) human self-antigens. Non-HS control individuals make antibodies against EBV but they do not make
antibodies against the expanded set of EBV epitopes that the HS patients do. These preliminary results suggest
a linkage between immune reactivity to novel EBV epitopes and self-antigens in HS. Interestingly, preliminary
studies show that HS skin lesions contain pauciclonal, class-switched, somatically mutated B cells and plasma
cells. The specificity of the antibodies encoded are unknown, and whether these play a crucial role in HS
pathogenesis remains unclear as well. Here we propose to (i) determine the clonal dynamics of B cells and
plasma cells in HS skin lesions (Aim 1), (ii) recreate human monoclonal antibodies encoded by these cells, and
test their ability to bind EBV and self-antigens. We will also map the unique epitopes in EBV targeted by these
HS skin lesion-derived monoclonal antibodies. We will then test if these EBV epitopes can be used as an ELISA
screening tool to assess disease severity in HS patients (Aim 2). The proposed work is significant because the
knowledge gained from these studies will help better understand the link between EBV and HS pathogenesis
and may help identify novel therapeutic strategies to reduce pain and suffering.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Efficacy and signaling modulation by targeting the sodium site at mu opioid receptor
Project Number: 1R01DA059978-01

Abstract:
ABSTRACT
Opioids until recently were the drugs of choice to treat moderate to severe chronic pain. Decades of intensive
research has led to the pharmacological characterization of countless synthetic and semi-synthetic opioid
derivatives. However, an ideal compound, devoid of serious side-effects such as respiratory depression,
dependence, and addiction, has not yet been identified. Opioid activation of mu opioid receptor (MOR) G protein
signaling pathways is believed to cause both desirable analgesia as well as undesirable adverse effects like
respiratory depression. Since MOR can couple with six Gi/o/z subtypes, namely Gi1, Gi2, Gi3, GOA, GOB and Gz, we
hypothesize that it may be possible to achieve functional selectivity by activating an individual Gα-isoform and/or
a combination of these isoforms. Our preliminary data shows that bitopics of fentanyl show unique Gi/o/z signaling
as well as a behavioral profile distinct from typical opioids. To this end, we have also obtained cryoEM structures
of MOR bound to one lead bitopics, C6 guano (3.3Å), and an analog of C6 guano named LG94 (3.4Å) getting
insights into distinct modes of ligand binding that also involves engagement of an allosteric binding site. We have
identified two distinct modes of engaging the sodium binding allosteric site in MOR and identified an antagonist
as well. In this study, we will interrogate Gα-subtype bias through screening of additional analogs, across both
fentanyl and morphinan based templates as well as novel indole-based templates and targeting the allosteric
site with additional bitopics with higher potency and optimal drug like properties. We will also develop a first in
class antagonist on the fentanyl template. High resolution cryoEM will be used on promising analogs to enable
structure-function studies and ligand binding fine-tuning. This, in turn, will enable us to design analogs that are
more effective and possibly display a more advantageous side-effect profile (no respiratory depression while
showing analgesia) than their parent compounds. These probes will also allow us to build a better framework for
understanding MOR Gα-subtype signaling and facilitate identification of useful preclinical candidates for the
treatment of pain/OUD in the near future. Furthermore, any novel antagonists could become tools in fighting
opioid-related substance abuse.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Telemedicine-delivered digital cognitive behavioral intervention to decrease post-operative opioid use among patients undergoing total knee and hip arthroplasty
Project Number: 1R21DA061414-01

Abstract:
PROJECT SUMMARY: Postoperative opioid prescription is an important contributor to the opioid epidemic,
affecting ~4% of >50 million Americans undergoing surgery each year. The dose and duration of treatment with
opioids in surgical patients is an established risk factor of opioid use disorder (OUD) and overdose deaths.
Although legislation and guidelines are developed to limit opioids prescribed following surgery in the US, in
2020, opioid overdose deaths increased by 39% with worsening mental health. Mood disorders, including
anxiety and depression, are risk factors for increased postoperative opioid use. Thus, innovative and effective
techniques to minimize the perioperative opioid use are critical in the fight of the opioid epidemic.
Cognitive behavioral intervention (CBI) has been proven to decrease acute and chronic pain as well as opioid
use among surgical patients. Recently, digital applications of CBI, the dCBI, is getting traction among
practitioners and patients due to ease of access via smartphones and 24/7 availability. The dCBI along with
telemedicine-based therapy coaches to treat anxiety among patients with inflammatory bowel disease proved
success. The availability of telemedicine-delivered digital CBI is a potential groundbreaking non-
pharmacological approach to limit opioid use among surgical patients. Our proposed work is also responsive
to NOT-DA-20-058 “Utilizing Telemedicine or Other Remote-Based Platforms to Develop and Support
Treatments for Substance Use Disorders.” Our pilot data using dCBI in conjunction with telemedicine among
moderately anxious and depressed patients scheduled for total hip and total knee arthroplasty (THA/TKA) is
supportive that dCBI was effective in reducing preoperative anxiety with a trend of decreased opioid use
postoperatively. Our central hypothesis is that the preoperative telemedicine-delivered dCBI will decrease
perioperative anxiety, depression, and pain catastrophizing in THA/TKA patients. Preoperative dCBI will
reduce severe postoperative pain, overall reduce opioid use, opioid-related complications, chronic persistent
surgical pain, and persistent opioid use at 3 months after surgery. Anxiety, depression, and catastrophizing
increase postoperative pain and opioid requirement by up to 50% and since dCBI reduces mood disorder
symptoms, we also hypothesized that using dCBI will also reduce anxiety, depression, catastrophizing and that
could represent a mechanism for decreased postoperative opioid requirements. Our team is well positioned to
perform this project and will 1) quantify opioid sparing properties of dCBI i n T H A / T K A u s i n g a
randomized, blinded clinical trial, 2) evaluate effects of reducing preoperative depression, anxiety and
catastrophizing, and 3) determine the effects of dose/time relationship of the preoperative dCBI on opioid
consumption. This research will improve surgical pain relief, safety of postoperative opioids while minimizing
opioid use, dependence, and risk of OUD in millions of Americans who have painful surgeries each year,
while increasing broad reach and dissemination potential via telemedicine technologies.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: microRNA regulation of NMNAT-mediated Neuroprotection against Peripheral Neuropathy and Chronic Pain
Project Number: 3R33AT010408-05S1

Abstract:
PROJECT SUMMARY
 Peripheral neuropathy and neuropathy pain can be caused by a myriad of genetic and environment
factors as well as therapeutic or recreational drug use. Chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy (CIPN) is
the major dose-limiting neurotoxic side effect of standard chemotherapy regiments. Over 68% of cancer patients
experience neuropathic symptoms after chemotherapy, and that contributes to a significant percent of the
population that suffer from chronic pain and often resort to opioid use. Peripheral neuropathy is closely
associated with Alzheimer’s related dementia. Specifically, a negative correlation between the severity of
peripheral neuropathy and cognitive performance has been reported in patients with dementia. The mechanisms
of CIPN and Alzheimer’s related neuropathy intersect at the dysregulation of neuronal microtubules. CIPN is
caused by microtubule-targeting chemo drugs, while a major pathology in AD is the dysregulation of microtubule
associated protein Tau (tauopathy). There is an urgent need to understand the in vivo mechanisms of CIPN and
AD related peripheral neuropathy. Recently, we have optimized a model of peripheral neuropathy using
Drosophila larvae that recapitulates salient behavioral, physiological, and cellular aspects of sensory dysfunction.
Our work using this model has uncovered a new mechanism underlying peripheral neuropathy and identified a
neuroprotective protein NMNAT with promising potential for mitigating neuropathic pain. Our preliminary studies
have identified several natural compounds that potentially upregulate NMNAT transcription and discovered the
exciting role of microRNAs in regulating both the pre-mRNA splicing and mature mRNA stability. The aims of
the parent R33 grant include, (1) test the neuroprotective activity of 9 microRNAs that regulate nociceptive
hypersensitivity and pain, (2) characterize the molecular pharmacology of 13 natural compounds in regulating
NMNAT expression and enhancing neuroprotection against peripheral neuropathy and chronic pain. The
objectives for the supplement application are to expand our testing portfolio to include genetic models of
Alzheimer’s disease and identify microRNAs and natural compounds that mitigate peripheral neuropathy in AD.
We have established Tauopathy models that recapitulate cellular pathology of Alzheimer’s including filamentous
accumulation of hyperphosphorylated Tau (pTau), neuronal degeneration, impaired nervous system physiology,
and shorted survival. Our preliminary pain behavior studies in AD models have observed a hypersensitivity to
pain in mutant hTau (hTauR406W) expressing nociceptors, consistent with clinical presentation of peripheral
neuropathy in AD patients. We propose to test our hypothesis that the neuronal microtubule dysregulation in
nociceptor neurons is a shared cellular mechanism underlying CIPN and AD induced pain. The proposed
supplement work is within the scope of the parent R33 project but expands the outcome to include I) mechanistic
characterization of microRNAs and natural compounds that augment NMNAT-mediate protection against
neuropathic pain in AD, and II) identify shared cellular mechanisms between CIPN and AD.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Thalamocortical dynamics during nociception and endogenous analgesia
Project Number: 1F99NS135765-01A1

Abstract:
Project Summary
Ineffective pain management is an urgent medical crisis impacting the lives of over 50 million Americans
and millions more chronic pain patients around the world. Opiate analgesics can provide robust pain relief but
can also produce life-threatening side effects and high rates of misuse, which contributes to the ongoing
Opioid Epidemic. Unlike the off-target effects of opiates that act widely throughout the body to indiscriminately
bind mu-opioid receptors (MOR) on many cell-types, endogenous opioid peptides mediating
antinociception undergo controlled release at specific synapses from specific nociception-related cell-types.
Identifying the precise noci-ceptive cell-types that express MORs, which are regulated by endogenous opioids,
may lead to new research developments for effective circuit-targeted analgesic treatments to minimize the
need for traditional opiate anal-gesics and reduce abuse liabilities. The rostral intralaminar thalamus {rlLN) is
critical in this regard as it is known to relay nociceptive information from spinal cord and brainstem structures
to cortical regions, such as the rostral anterior cingulate cortex (rACC). rlLN neurons express high densities of
MORs {rlLNMOR), yet it remains unknown whether endogenous forms of pain relief modulate nociceptive
activity within this rlLNMOR ➔ rACC circuit. To enhance our investigations into thalamocortical circuits in
endogenous analgesia processes, we have developed an operant conditioning assay that leverages
expectation-induced antinociception, i.e. placebo analgesia, in a drug-free manner. The F99 phase entails two
subaims. In Aim 1a, the applicant will leverage in vivo fiber photometry calcium imaging to determine
nociception and analgesia-related responses in the axonal projections of rlLNMOR ➔ rACC. In Aim 1b, to
determine the necessity of MOR signaling in thalamocortical neurons for the endogenous analgesia response,
the applicant will use an intersectional genetic and viral approach to selectively delete MORs from rlLN ➔ rACC
neurons. The KOO phase, Aim 2, will help prepare the applicant for a successful academic research career
investigating neurobiological mechanisms of gastrointestinal pain. This postdoctoral period will provide the
applicant with expertise in techniques like 2-photon calcium imaging of neural population dynamics in the brain
during visceral pain models, as well as sharpen managerial and mentoring skills necessary to succeed and
thrive as an independent research scientist. In total, successful completion of this proposal will provide insight
into neurobiological mechanisms underlying pain and analgesia, while also equipping the applicant, Lindsay
Ejoh, to uncover brain circuit mechanisms of severe and chronic gastrointestinal pain disorders under her own
independent research program.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Novel treatments of fracture repair and bone pain
Project Number: 1R01AR083130-01A1

Abstract:
SUMMARY
Chronic pain and disability after bone fracture in the aged population are common. Approaches to pain
management following orthopaedic surgery often include the use of opioids. The use of non-narcotic drugs such
as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) for fracture pain is of limited use in the United States because
of data suggesting that NSAIDs inhibit early fracture healing. Therefore, identifying new analgesics that do not
compromise bone healing or contribute to chronic pain conditions is important. Here we will explore the role of
the neuropeptide calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), which is widely distributed in sensory nerves that
innervate the skeleton, in both the bone healing process and in mediating chronic pain due to bone fracture in
mice. Our approach will test the hypothesis that CGRP signaling is beneficial for bone healing following fracture
but compromises the return to normal physiological functioning of the individual due to nociceptive neuron
sensitization. This hypothesis will be tested in a setting of a murine model of surgically created femoral fracture
using male and female mice. These mice will determine the impact of fracture-targeted delivery of CGRP
(tCGRP) on bone healing in animals with treatment of a re-purposed anti-CGRP monoclonal antibody to
modulate nociceptive pain due to fracture. Successful completion of this application will provide new insights as
to how modulation of CGRP regulates bone healing, inflammation, and pain states. This project, testing
therapeutic strategies associated with the regulation of CGRP, may ultimately improve fracture healing and
reduce the need for opioid usage for post-fracture pain management.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Functional connectivity mechanisms of opioid abstinence
Project Number: 1R01DA060631-01

Abstract:
Abstract
Opioid use disorder (OUD) is a significant public health problem with opioid-associated overdoses and deaths
reaching epidemic levels in recent years. Methadone and buprenorphine are widely used and generally effective
medications for OUD (MOUDs). However, relapse and nonadherence rates remain high and average treatment
retention is suboptimal (e.g., <6 months in 30-50% of cases). As risk of overdose is highest following relapse
and treatment dropout, improved mechanistic understanding of risk and resilience factors in individuals in early
MOUD (i.e., <6 months) is urgently needed. This application uses network-based analysis, with built-in cross-
validation, to identify brain networks associated with (i) patterns of illicit opioid use during early MOUD and (ii)
medication adherence during early MOUD in a diverse sample of individuals (N=240, 50% female, 50% male,
50% receiving methadone, 50% receiving buprenorphine). This is critical to improve understanding of
mechanisms and predictors of MOUD response and is an essential precursor to development of improved,
evidence-based interventions grounded in known neurobiology. This work builds on our prior work identifying
brain connections prospectively associated with future relapse to illicit opioids during sustained MOUD. The
identified ‘opioid abstinence network’ included connections between frontoparietal, salience, sensorimotor and
default mode regions and was robust to analyses controlling for relevant clinical variables (e.g., MOUD dose,
years of opioid use). In AIM 1, we seek to externally validate and extend this finding via collection of
neuroimaging data from a larger, more diverse sample of individuals early in MOUD treatment. In AIM 2, we
propose to collect additional, multi-task neuroimaging data to determine the impact of different, task-induced
brain states on network identification. Finally, in AIM 3, we will use our recently developed approach, in which
variation in model accuracies are assessed as a function of core sources of clinical diveristy (e.g., sex,
medication dose, co-occurring disorders), to identify sources of model bias and neurobiological heterogeneity.
Assessing sources of model bias and neurobiological heterogeneity embraces the clinical complexity that is
inherent to the current opioid epidemic. These clinical sources of variance have typically either been excluded
for or ignored (e.g., treated as covariates of no interest) in prior neuroimaging studies of MOUD. All acquired
data will be shared via the NIMH Data Archive.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Thrombopoietin Mimetic Peptides for Treatment of Fractures
Project Number: 1I01BX006399-01

Abstract:
SUMMARY
 Veterans with fractures suffer from injury-associated pain as well as post-operative surgical pain. The
occurrence of a fracture contributes to acute pain and is largely manifested by mechanical, inflammatory, and
neuropathic components. The LEAP study of high-energy lower extremity trauma showed that acute pain, in
the recovery period after severe trauma, is the single largest predictor of long-term chronic pain 5-10 years
after injury. There are 2 main strategies to treat trauma-induced and post-surgical pain: opioids and
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Neither drug class completely alleviates pain, and both have
negative side effects. Opioids, beyond eliciting cognitive impairment, are commonly associated with tolerance
and addiction. NSAIDs are commonly used in combination with opioids following thoracic/abdominal surgery
but use of this drug class for fracture pain is discouraged in the U.S. due to negative effects on skeletal health
and healing of the injured skeleton. It is unclear which drug class is less destructive to the bone repair process
but prevention of nonunion is paramount in the treatment of fractures as it places additional burden on the
patient and the healthcare system due to prolonged pain and disability. Therefore, identification of therapies
which improve both the bone healing process and diminish the fracture-associated pain is warranted. Our
group has previously shown that the main megakaryocyte (MK) growth factor, thrombopoietin (TPO), can
improve bone healing. In preliminary studies we demonstrate that fracture targeting thrombopoietin mimetic
peptides (TMPs) also markedly improve fracture healing, and that high levels of platelet derived growth factor
(PDGF) are observed at the fracture site with TMP treatment. As both osteoblasts (OBs) and endothelial cells
(ECs) express the receptor for PDGF (PDGFRβ), actions of PDGF on these cells could be responsible for the
improvements in bone healing observed. On the other hand, PDGF expression is also known to increase pain
behaviors, and PDGFRβ is also expressed on sensory neurons. Based on these observations we
hypothesize that short-term administration of TMP will increase PDGF at the fracture site, stimulating OB
and EC activity, leading to accelerated bone healing. Because inhibition of the PDGF-PDGFRβ axis has been
shown to attenuate pain behaviors, we further hypothesize that inhibition of PDGFRβ-signaling subsequent
to the inflammatory phase of fracture healing, at 8-30 days post-surgery, will decrease chronic pain and
inflammation without compromising fracture healing. Three specific aims will address this hypothesis. In Aim
1, we will determine if systemic versus targeted TMP can accelerate post-fracture bone healing and reduce
inflammation and pain behaviors. In Aim 2, we will determine if PDGFRβ signaling in OBs and/or ECs is
required for TMP-stimulated bone healing. In Aim 3, we will determine if inhibiting PDGFRβ-signaling
following TMP treatment reduces chronic pain behavior. Identification of novel inhibitors of chronic pain could
also decrease the use of opioids for pain management of musculoskeletal injuries and serve as an important
step in mitigating the opioid crisis.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Integrated, Individualized, and Intelligent Prescribing (I3P) Clinical Trial Network
Project Number: 3U01HG010232-05S2

Abstract:
The promise of genomic medicine to transform healthcare and improve health will not be fully realized until
discoveries become relevant to and available for use by diverse populations and their clinicians. As part of the
IGNITE II network, we are proposing two prospective randomized pragmatic genotype-guided clinical trials
(GUARDD-US and ADOPT-PGx) to determine the impact of implementing genetic testing on hypertension,
depression, and pain therapies.
 GUARDD-US: Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is associated with hypertension. People with African ancestry
(AAs) have the highest risk of CKD and kidney failure, the highest prevalence of hypertension, and the lowest
rate of blood pressure (BP) control. While this disparity is in part due to social determinants, ancestry has
biological underpinnings and APOL1 high-risk genetic variants, nearly exclusive found in AAs, increase kidney
failure risk 10-fold. We propose a genotype-guided trial to determine the effect of early vs. delayed knowledge
of a positive APOL1 genotyping result on 3-month systolic blood pressure (SBP). The trial aims to recruit 5435
African Americans with hypertension, with or without CKD, randomized to immediate versus delayed return of
APOL1 genetic testing. In those who are APOL1 negative, we will also conduct a pilot study to test the impact
of pharmacogenetic (PGx) testing on SBP. Secondary outcomes include 6-month SBP, in CKD patients, on
medications ordered, renal diagnosis and testing patient psycho-behavioral outcomes, cost effectiveness, and
the effect of PGX guided hypertension management on SBP.
 ADOPT-PGx: Pain and depression are conditions that impact substantial proportions of the US population.
The treatment of acute and chronic pain is challenged by the difficulty of finding effective therapies while
minimizing the risk of adverse effects or opioid addiction. For depression, there are few clinically relevant
predictors of successful treatment, which results in inadequate therapy for many patients. Both opioid and
antidepressant prescriptions can be guided by PGx data based on existing guidelines from the Clinical
Pharmacogenetics Implementation Consortium (CPIC). We propose a prospective randomized pragmatic
genotype-guided clinical trial that tests the effect of genotype-guided therapy in three scenarios of patients:
acute post-surgical pain, chronic pain, and depression. For each scenario, participants will be randomized to
genotype-guided drug therapy versus usual approaches to drug therapy selection. Changes in patient reported
outcomes representing pain and depression control using standard PROMIS scales define the primary
endpoints. Secondary analyses include safety endpoints, changes in overall well-being, and economic impact
represented by differences in healthcare utilization.
 We expect the successful results from these clinical trials will provide critical evidence needed to drive the
implementation of genomic medicine across broad demographics of patient populations.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Development of PAC1 receptor antagonists for the treatment of Headache Disorders
Project Number: 1R61NS136307-01

Abstract:
Project Summary
Chronic use of commonly used migraine therapies, such as triptans and opioids, can lead to medication overuse
headache (MOH). This is a paradoxical increase in severity of migraine-associated symptoms and headaches
which are refractory to other treatments. Currently, the first-line treatment for MOH is drug cessation. However,
during this abstinence period, patients continue to suffer from severe migraine, and in the case of opioids from
withdrawal; and a majority of MOH patients return to these medications within the first year. Targeted therapies
specifically for MOH would result in better headache management and increased patient quality of life. Our lab
has recently investigated mechanisms of MOH. Through an unbiased peptidomic screen, our lab identified the
neuropeptide, pituitary adenylate cyclase activating polypeptide (PACAP), as being augmented in preclinical
models of chronic migraine and MOH. Our preliminary data suggests that antagonism of PAC1, a high affinity
PACAP receptor, inhibits allodynia and aura associated with MOH. However, the PACAPergic system is
relatively understudied and there is a lack of selective ligands to the PAC1 receptor. Currently there are only 3
PAC1 inhibitors, and two of them are peptides. Although the small molecule antagonist, PA8, is effective in our
models, it has only moderate potency. The objective of this proposal is to develop novel PAC1 receptor
antagonists for the treatment of MOH. This grant aims to develop a collaboration between the Pradhan,
Majumdar, and Katritch labs. The Pradhan, Katritch and Majumdar labs have expertise in PAC1
pharmacology/behavioral models, computational modeling, medicinal chemistry, pharmacology and structure-
based design of drug molecules. In Aim 1, the Katritch group will utilize a combination of virtual ligand screening,
and their new platform based on V-SYNTHES on structures of PAC1 to identify novel molecules with antagonistic
activity at this receptor. As a second avenue, we also propose to optimize the potency of PA8, using structure-
based design, and discover new compounds with improved in vivo activity compared to the parent
(Katritch/Majumdar). In Aim 2 we will pharmacologically characterize promising lead compounds. We will
evaluate PAC1 antagonists for potency and selectivity in cAMP assays in transfected cell lines (Pradhan) as well
as in vitro ADME and pharmacokinetic analysis in plasma and brain (Majumdar). Finally, in Aim 3 we will test the
most promising lead PAC1 antagonists in models of MOH and migraine. We will also perform preliminary tests
exploring adverse CNS effects of lead compounds. This R61 mechanism will allow us to establish a
multidisciplinary and collaborative team to identify and characterize promising lead candidates targeting the
PAC1 receptor for the treatment of MOH.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Virtual Reality Treatment for Chronic Pain and OUD In Opioid Treatment Programs: A Randomized Controlled Trial
Project Number: 1R01DA060796-01

Abstract:
PROJECT ABSTRACT
 Over half of the 6 million persons with opioid use disorder (OUD) in the United States also suffer from
chronic pain, which reinforces a negative cycle of negative cycle of poor health outcomes and increased risk of
illicit opioid use. There is a desperate, pressing need for innovative and equitable therapies to relieve suffering
of patients with comorbid chronic pain and OUD.
 Mindfulness interventions are thought to affect pain and opioid use through directly increasing dispositional
mindfulness and by indirectly decreasing stress response, improving cognitive processing of pain (e.g., pain
acceptance), increasing positive affect, and by reducing opioid craving. Based on our group’s compelling pilot
data, we will test the hypothesis that an immersive mindfulness VR intervention will improve pain and illicit
opioid use among people with chronic pain and OUD. To do so, we will conduct a randomized controlled trial to
test the efficacy of an on-site evidence-based immersive mindfulness VR treatment (RelieVRx) vs non-
immersive VR (sham VR). We will enroll and randomize 185 participants with chronic pain and OUD to either
twice-weekly RelieVRx or twice-weekly Sham VR over 8 weeks at OTPs in the Bronx, NY, the poorest borough
in New York and a consistent epicenter for the opioid epidemic. Our co-primary outcomes are pain intensity
and illicit opioid use at 12 weeks.
 We will test the effectiveness of immersive mindfulness VR on pain and illicit opioid use in patients with
chronic pain and opioid use disorder enrolled at opioid treatment programs (Aim 1). We will examine daily
effects of the intervention on mindfulness, stress, pain, opioid craving, and physiologic stress responses (Aim
2). Lastly, we will explore mechanisms underlying intervention effects (Aim 3).
 This highly innovative project utilizes novel and emerging technology to address critical gaps in care in
vulnerable populations with comorbid chronic pain and OUD. Given our experience and expertise, our multi-
disciplinary team is well positioned to test an immersive mindfulness VR intervention in an opioid treatment
program.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Modulation of pain hypersensitivity by terpenes via endocannabinoid release in descending circuits
Project Number: 1F31AT012836-01

Abstract:
Project Abstract
Twenty percent of US adults suffer from chronic pain, a condition characterized by reduced mental and
physical well-being, and despite current treatments over half of patients experience undertreated pain
symptoms. Although the most efficacious medications for pain are opioids, they possess serious side effects
and long-term consequences, highlighting the importance of identifying novel therapeutics for treating pain.
There is established clinical and preclinical evidence that cannabis (a plant containing over 550 chemical
compounds including terpenes) possesses analgesic/anti-allodynic effects, at least partially explained by
cannabis’s action on cannabinoid 1 (CB1) receptors. Cannabis strains with high terpene (odor-causing
molecules of the cannabis plant) concentrations are preferred among patients who use cannabis, and
preclinical work on rodents (demonstrated by the applicant) has shown terpenes can produce antiallodynic
effects in pain models, which was blocked by CB1 receptor antagonists despite not directly binding to these
receptors. In order to advance the understanding of how terpenes interplay with the endocannabinoid system
to relieve pain, the goal of this proposed research is to elucidate how terpenes may alter eCB levels using a
sophisticated and novel modified eGFP CB1 receptor sensor. The ventrolateral periaqueductal gray (vlPAG), a
region involved in the descending modulation of pain, has a dense population of CB1 receptors and stimulating
this area induces analgesia. This sensor paired with fiber photometry will be used to measure
endocannabinoid release in the vlPAG in vivo in mouse models of chronic pain.
 The Cahill laboratory uses a Chronic Constriction Injury (CCI) model of neuropathic chronic pain in
mice that captures the acute hypersensitivity and negative affect associated with chronic pain in humans. By
naturally increasing endocannabinoids via inhibitors of their degradation (FAAH/MAGL inhibitors), Aim 1 will
determine if myrcene can augment changes in hyperalgesia and negative-affect like behaviors in CCI mice,
partially attenuated by knockdown or antagonism of vlPAG CB1 receptors. Aim 2 will address mechanism of
action by directly measuring endocannabinoid release using a genetically modified eGFP CB1 receptor sensor
in awake, freely-moving animals. This will be achieved by measuring endocannabinoid release before and after
terpene administration in the vlPAG. Such findings would identify non-intoxicating, FDA-approved compounds
that rapidly modulate endocannabinoid levels as a potential therapeutic strategy. UCLA contains supportive
and collaborative atmosphere with personnel specializing in photometry, in-house virus packaging, and
resources from an established chronic pain laboratory. This productive an integrative environment will support
this trainee plan for a scientist with a disadvantaged background toward her goals of conducting her own
research laboratory at an R1 institution.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Enhanced Pain Coping in Cancer (EPIC)
Project Number: 1R01CA285746-01A1

Abstract:
PROJECT SUMMARY/ABSTRACT
Chronic pain is a common symptom that affects 30-40% of cancer survivors, diminishing their quality of life,
impairing physical functions, and increasing health care costs. Breast cancer survivors constitute the largest
group of survivors with more than 4.1 million in the US. Nearly one in two breast cancer survivors who take a
class of medication known as aromatase inhibitors are affected by a chronic painful condition, aromatase
inhibitor-associated arthralgia (AIA). AIA is associated with reduced physical activity, increased risk of falls, and
reduced AI adherence, leading to increased overall mortality. With insufficient relief from conventional
treatments and a rapidly growing population of breast cancer survivors, there is an urgent need to develop
novel, effective, and scalable pain management options. Mindfulness-Oriented Recovery Enhancement
(MORE) is an innovative mindfulness-based intervention (MBI) rooted in affective neuroscience that integrates
training in mindfulness, reappraisal, and savoring skills to specifically target chronic pain and related symptoms
(e.g. psychological distress). Although the efficacy of MORE for pain in non-cancer populations has been
established, the potential for this mindfulness intervention to address pain and comorbid symptoms in breast
cancer survivors has yet to be confirmed. Therefore, a rigorous, adequately-powered randomized controlled
trial is needed to conclusively determine whether MBIs such as MORE can alleviate AIA. To address this
critical gap in research and clinical care, we have convened a multidisciplinary team to conduct the Enhanced
Pain Coping in Cancer (EPIC) trial with the following specific aims: 1) to evaluate the specific efficacy of MORE
for managing AIA among breast cancer survivors, 2) to evaluate the specific effects of MORE on comorbid
symptoms, quality of life, and adherence to AIs, and 3) to elucidate the cognitive-affective mechanisms of
MORE for pain management among breast cancer survivors. The MORE intervention that we will test aligns
with a downward spiral of chronic pain model and neuroscience and is based on discoveries from preliminary
studies. For this multisite, randomized controlled trial we will randomize 200 breast cancer survivors free of
oncologic disease with AIA to one of two eight-week treatments: 1) MORE or 2) supportive group
psychotherapy (SG). We will assess the primary outcome (pain-related functional interference) and secondary
outcomes at baseline, week 8 (end of treatment), week 12 and week 24 (primary end point) using validated
patient-reported outcomes. EPIC will address major methodological limitations of existing MBI trials including
pain not being a primary outcome, no eligibility requirement for having pain, and the MBIs under investigation
having been developed to target stress management rather than pain management. EPIC will provide timely
clinical evidence for MORE, a neuroscience-informed, mindfulness-based intervention for pain and co-morbid
symptoms, during cancer survivorship. Further, virtual delivery will ensure MORE is highly scalable with broad
reach to improve pain management for millions of breast cancer survivors across the US.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Evaluating the Association Between General Chronic Pain Liability and Clinically Recognized Substance Use
Project Number: 1F31DA061638-01

Abstract:
Project Summary/Abstract
Chronic pain presence is overrepresented among individuals with substance use disorder (SUD), with
evidence suggesting that in the United States, over two-thirds of individuals with a drug use disorder have
chronic pain. To inform efforts to meliorate the burden of co-occurring chronic pain and substance use, it is
critical to first clarify their underlying mechanisms. Studies often conclude that chronic pain may be causally
linked to substance use. Yet, the lack of research accounting for the heterogeneity across and comorbidity
among chronic pain conditions themselves, as well as plausible alternative explanations of chronic pain and
substance use comorbidity related to shared familial factors (i.e., genetic and environmental confounding) pose
a challenge for such conclusions. The overall objective of the proposed project is to estimate the effect of
chronic pain on substance use accounting for the heterogeneity across and comorbidity among chronic pain
conditions. An additional objective involves receiving training that will help foster an independent research
career assessing substance use and its comorbidities. The rationale for the project is that deepening
understandings of chronic pain’s effect on risk of SUD/OD is likely to further knowledge of chronic pain and
substance use comorbidity, which is critical for informing research and substance use prevention and
treatment initiatives for individuals with chronic pain. The central hypothesis is that a general chronic pain
liability can help explain risk of SUD/OD, which could promote nuanced pain management among individuals
concurrently using substances. The proposal will test this hypothesis in two specific aims: 1) Estimate general
and condition-specific associations between chronic pain conditions and SUD/OD and 2) Estimate general and
condition-specific effects with SUD/OD accounting for familial confounding by design. Aim 1 will implement a
bifactor model capturing chronic pain condition comorbidity and heterogeneity to assess the association
between general chronic pain liability and risk of SUD/OD. Aim 1 will also compare this model to alternative
models to justify considering the role of general chronic pain liability in risk of SUD/OD. Aim 2 will apply a co-
twin control design, comparing twins discordant on chronic pain and SUD/OD to adjust for unmeasured
confounding by factors shared by siblings. The proposed research is innovative, in the applicant's opinion,
because it capitalizes on a unique, prospective, population-based twin cohort to assess the relationship
between condition-general and condition-specific chronic pain processes and SUD/OD. Further, the proposal
will use a co-twin control approach to account for shared familial factors more effectively than prior research.
This proposal is significant because it is expected to help clarify the extent to which chronic pain affects risk of
SUD/OD, which will help ascertain if reducing chronic pain decreases risk of SUD/OD or if intervening on other
factors is more effective for reducing risk of SUD/OD among individuals with chronic pain.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Role of the gut microbiome in prolonged pain hypersensitivity following neonatal morphine exposure
Project Number: 1F31DA059204-01A1

Abstract:
Project Summary
In a murine model, neonatal morphine exposure (NME) results in prolonged pain hypersensitivity in
adolescence and adulthood; however, the underlying mechanisms are not fully understood. In adults, morphine
exposure has been found to alter the gut microbiome leading to gut dysbiosis. Gut dysbiosis has been
associated with microglial activation and neuroinflammation, which are critical in the initiation and persistence
of several pathological pain states. Activation of the microglia in the midbrain periaqueductal gray (PAG) and
spinal cord has been found to be heavily implicated in the development of the opioid-induced hypersensitivity
to pain. I recently showed that NME resulted in long-term gut dysbiosis persisting in adolescence and into
adulthood. However, the role of the gut microbiome, in particular NME-induced gut dysbiosis, have not yet
been investigated in prolonged pain hypersensitivity following NME. Therefore, the goal in this study is to
investigate the role of the gut microbiome in driving prolonged hypersensitivity to pain following NME. The
overarching hypothesis is that NME results in prolonged pain hypersensitivity by inducing long-lasting
alterations to the gut microbiome and driving persistent neuroinflammation in the microglia. To test this
hypothesis, in specific aim 1, the causal role of the gut microbiome in driving prolonged hypersensitivity to pain
will be investigated using Fecal Microbial Transplantation (FMT) of a dysbiotic microbiome from NME-mice
(donor) into naïve age-matched mice (recipient) to test whether an NME-microbiome alone results in pain
hypersensitivity. Furthermore, probiotics will be administered during the NME period to rescue the NME-
induced dysbiosis and to investigate whether a probiotic intervention can attenuate pain hypersensitivity
following NME. To elucidate the underlying molecular mechanisms, aim 2 will seek to establish that NME-
induced dysbiosis modulates microglial activation in regions that are essential for the processing and
modulation of pain, in particular the PAG and spinal cord, which drives pain hyper-sensitivity. Thus, using
immunohistochemistry, the activation status of the microglia in the PAG and spinal cord of NME-off springs will
be assessed. Additionally, the levels of released pro-inflammatory and nociceptive markers will be assessed
using RT-qPCR for mRNA determination and a Multiplex bead array for protein determination. Tissues from
the mice with manipulated microbiome generated in aim 1 will also be investigated to implicate the gut
microbiome. Finally, to further establish the involvement of the microglia on prolonged pain hypersensitivity, the
microglia of NME-off springs will be depleted during adolescence and adulthood with the CSF1R antagonist,
(PLX) 5622. Pain sensitivity will be tested following the short-term microglial depletion. Overall, this study will
advance our current understanding of the mechanisms driving hypersensitivity to pain following NME. The
results from these studies will be used to develop therapeutic strategies such as early life probiotic therapy to
mitigate long-term consequences of early opioid exposure.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: IGNITE EP2 - Admin Supplement
Project Number: 3U01HG007269-09S3

Abstract:
Project Summary
The current administrative supplement request is for a 12-month extension with funding to complete the
ongoing IGNITE Network pragmatic clinical trials, GUARDD-US and ADOPT PGx. The GUARDD-US and
ADOPT PGx trials have been underway since July 2020 and February 2021, respectively. These trials will help
determine the impact of implementing genetic testing on hypertension, depression, and pain therapies.
GUARDD-US: Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is associated with hypertension. People with African ancestry
(AAs) have the highest risk of CKD and kidney failure, the highest prevalence of hypertension, and the lowest
rate of blood pressure (BP) control. While this disparity is in part due to social determinants, ancestry has
biological underpinnings, and APOL1 high-risk genetic variants, exclusively found in AAs, increase kidney
failure risk 10-fold. We propose a genotype-guided trial to determine the effect of early vs. delayed knowledge
of a positive APOL1 genotyping result on 3-month systolic blood pressure (SBP). The clinical trial aims to
recruit African Americans with hypertension, with or without CKD, randomized to immediate versus delayed
return of APOL1 genetic testing. In those who are APOL1 negative, we will also conduct a pilot study to test
the impact of pharmacogenetic (PGx) testing on SBP. ADOPT PGx: Pain and depression are conditions that
impact substantial proportions of the US population. The treatment of acute and chronic pain is challenged by
the difficulty of finding effective therapies while minimizing the risk of adverse effects or opioid addiction. For
depression, there are few clinically relevant predictors of successful treatment, which results in inadequate
therapy for many patients. We propose a prospective randomized pragmatic genotype-guided clinical trial that
tests the effect of genotype-guided therapy in three scenarios of patients: acute post-surgical pain, chronic
pain, and depression. For each scenario, participants will be randomized to genotype-guided drug therapy
versus usual approaches to drug therapy selection. Changes in patient-reported outcomes representing pain
and depression control using standard PROMIS scales define the primary endpoints. Secondary analyses
include safety endpoints, changes in overall well-being, and economic impact represented by differences in
healthcare utilization. A 12-month extension with funding is needed due to unanticipated network-wide delays
in launching each trial and shutdowns due to COVID-19. The funding requested in this administrative
supplement reflects the trial close-out needs and the costs associated with leading analyses and publication
costs for 13 secondary manuscripts.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Role of Anterior Cingulate Cortex Ensemble Regulation of Spinal Cord Excitability in Associative Opioid Analgesic Tolerance.
Project Number: 1K99DA060951-01

Abstract:
Project Summary
Opioid medications are highly prescribed for pain management. However, these drugs have considerable abuse
liability. As users increase their opioid intake, they build tolerance against their therapeutic effects. Despite well-
described molecular and cellular mechanisms, tolerance can be reversed when the drug is taken in another
context, a phenomenon known as associative analgesic tolerance. Since associative analgesic tolerance can
lead to escalation of use, it increases the risk of opioid use disorder and fatal overdose. Uncovering neuronal
mechanisms underlying associative analgesic tolerance will inform the development of new treatment options to
mitigate pain while decreasing opioid use and overdoses. Using a novel behavioral training paradigm in mice, I
identified brain regions activated by tolerance. The anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) plays a crucial role in
contextual learning, nociception, and opioid analgesia, which are aspects of associative tolerance. My
preliminary data indicate that associative tolerance induces the formation of a tolerance-active neuronal
ensemble in the ACC (ACCtol-active). Preliminary studies using fiber photometry and chemogenetic approaches
suggest that ACC activity tracks tolerance state and is necessary for associative tolerance expression. These
data indicate that the ACC may be an orchestrator of associative tolerance. The ACC projects directly to the
spinal cord (SC), and activation of this projection increases nociception. I hypothesize that ACCtol-active neurons
produce associative tolerance by integrating context and drug signals to increase SC excitability in the presence
of opioids. In the K99 phase, I will determine the role of the ACCtol-active ensemble in associative tolerance using
a combination of transgenic tools for ensemble tagging, fiber photometry, and optogenetics. I anticipate that
ACCtol-active activity will be upregulated during tolerance and that the bi-directional modulation of this ensemble
will induce or prevent tolerance. In the R00 phase, I will use viral-mediated tracing and chemogenetic approaches
to determine if ACCtol-active forms functional connections onto the SC and if modulating this pathway can alter
associative tolerance. These experiments will help define the role of specific ACC ensembles and the ACC to
SC circuit in associative analgesic tolerance. In addition to significant scientific advances in understanding the
neural substrates driving contextual control of analgesic tolerance, this K99 proposal will provide me with training
and mentorship to increase my technical and academic skills, building a foundation for my career as an
independent investigator with my research laboratory. During the training phase, I will acquire extensive training
in optical techniques, corticospinal circuit manipulations in vivo, and career development. This training, combined
with my expertise in behavioral pharmacology and addiction models, will equip me to transition to independence
as an Assistant Professor. During the R00 phase, I will apply these techniques to defining corticospinal circuits
involved in associative tolerance. The training and support from this proposal will provide the scientific and
mentorship tools needed for me to establish a successful, independent academic laboratory.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Enhancing pain management for knee replacement patients through an innovative non-invasive and opioid-sparing device
Project Number: 1R41DA059303-01A1

Abstract:
PROJECT SUMMARY
As the population ages, knee replacement surgery has become one of the most common elective surgical
procedures. By 2030, over 3 million people per year are expected to undergo total knee arthroplasty (TKA). 90%
of individuals experience postoperative pain, and 80% of those affected control the pain using prescribed opioids.
Unfortunately, long-term postoperative pain after TKA often leads to opioid use disorders, increases the risk of
complications, extends the length of hospital stay, and increases overall medical cost. There is currently an
unmet need for the development of alternative non-opioid therapies for postoperative pain management
associated with TKA.
nCAP Medical in collaboration with the University of Pittsburgh seeks to address the unmet need for better
postoperative pain management tools by developing a patented, state-of-the-art, easy-to-use,
nonpharmacological pain relief device (NEUROCUPLE™) for patients undergoing TKA. Preliminary data from a
pilot study with 60 patients undergoing TKA demonstrated that the NEUROCUPLE device reduced opioid refills
in the first 30 postoperative days by 47% in the NEUROCUPLE group (29%) versus standard of care group
(55%).
The goal of this Phase I project is to evaluate the use of NEUROCUPLE as a non-pharmacological postoperative
pain relief treatment following TKA in a randomized placebo-controlled clinical trial. For this study, 120 patients
will be randomized (1:1 ratio) to the NEUROCUPLE group or placebo group before surgery. TKA will be
performed using approved enhanced recovery protocol for pain management (standardized at UPMC). After
surgery, an active NEUROCUPLE device (intervention group) or an identical placebo device (placebo group) will
be applied over the knee for 2 weeks. All patients will receive standard of perioperative care including multimodal
pain management. Primary endpoints are pain at rest and prescribed opioid refills in the first 6 weeks. Secondary
endpoints are pain while walking, time to discharge, functional recovery (i.e., range of motion, ability to walk),
and total postoperative opioid consumption.
Successful completion of this Phase I program will demonstrate effectiveness and superiority of the
NEUROCUPLE device vs placebo as a non-invasive, non-pharmacological alternative to opioids for the
treatment of postoperative pain following TKA. This will support the FDA device approval for the indication of
postoperative pain relief following TKA and payor reimbursements. In our Phase II STTR, we will explore other
indications using a larger patient population, patients with mood disorders, and a placebo control design for other
procedures such as hip replacement and spine surgeries.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: microRNA regulation of NMNAT-mediated Neuroprotection against Peripheral Neuropathy and Chronic Pain
Project Number: 7R33AT010408-05

Abstract:
MicroRNA Regulation of NMNAT-Mediated Neuroprotection Against Peripheral Neuropathy and
 Chronic Pain
 PROJECT SUMMARY
 Peripheral neuropathy and neuropathy pain can be caused by a myriad of genetic and environment
factors as well as therapeutic or recreational drug use. In particular, chemotherapy-induced peripheral
neuropathy (CIPN) is the major dose-limiting neurotoxic side effect of standard chemotherapy regiments. Over
68% of cancer patients experience neuropathic symptoms after chemotherapy, and that contributes to a
significant percent of the population that suffer from chronic pain and have to resort to opioid use. Currently
there are no effective treatments available, largely due to a lack of understanding of the in vivo mechanisms of
CIPN and related peripheral neuropathy. Recently, we have optimized a model of peripheral neuropathy using
Drosophila larvae that recapitulates salient behavior and neuronal morphological aspects of chemotherapy-
induced sensory dysfunction. Our preliminary work using this model has uncovered a new mechanism
underlying peripheral neuropathy, and identified a neuroprotective protein NMNAT with promising potential for
mitigating neuropathic pain. The ultimate goal of our research is to uncover the endogenous mechanisms
underlying peripheral neuropathy and to identify neuroprotective mechanisms and potential targets that
facilitate the development of new therapeutic agents against CIPN and related neuropathic pain.
 Our previous work on neuronal maintenance and protection has identified NMNAT (nicotinamide
mononucleotide adenylyl transferase), the last enzyme in NAD+ synthesis pathway, as an essential gene that
maintains neuronal structural and functional integrity. Extensive mechanistic studies from our lab and others
have found NMNAT proteins in Drosophila and mammals to be among the most robust and versatile
neuroprotective factors, and a positive correlation between NMNAT expression levels and the neuronal self-
protective capacity. Excitingly, from a compound screen, several natural compounds were identified to
upregulate NMNAT transcription, and we have collected intriguing preliminary results suggesting that the
expression of NMNAT is regulated by microRNAs. We hypothesize that regulation of NMNAT RNA expression
by natural compounds and microRNAs at the steps of transcription, pre-mRNA splicing, and mRNA stability
allows rapid and dynamic shifting between NMNAT mediated NAD+ metabolism and neuronal resilience, and
confers protection in sensory neurons against peripheral neuropathy. In this application we outline
experiments to (1) identify microRNAs that regulate nociceptive hypersensitivity, (2) identify and characterize
the molecular pharmacology of natural compounds in regulating NMNAT expression, and (3) modulate NMNAT
transcriptional regulation to enhance neuroprotection against peripheral neuropathy. Within the network of
convergent pathways responding to chemotherapy induced peripheral neuropathy, understanding the
regulation of NMNAT in both NAD+-metabolism and enhancing neuronal homeostasis will facilitate discovery of
neuroprotective strategies in peripheral neuropathy and neuropathic pain.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Cellular Mechanisms and Therapeutic Potential of NR4A1 in Pain Resolution
Project Number: 1RF1NS136108-01

Abstract:
ABSTRACT
Chronic pain and opioid misuse are two intertwined health crises in the US. We know more about how chronic
pain develops than how it naturally resolves. Our hypothesis is that the disruption of endogenous pro-resolution
mechanisms causes chronic pain, and targeting these mechanisms can lead to more effective and safe pain
treatment. Our grant proposal entitled "Cellular Mechanisms and Therapeutic Potential of NR4A1 in Pain
Resolution" aims to investigate the nuclear receptor subfamily 4, group A, member 1 (NR4A1) as an endogenous
mediator for pain resolution. Evidence suggests that NR4A1 limits inflammation and restores homeostasis in
various diseases. However, its role in pain is unknown. In our preliminary studies, we discovered that NR4A1 is
expressed in macrophages and increases during the resolution phase of in a mouse model of postoperative
pain. Furthermore, we demonstrated that lack of NR4A1 expression results in chronic postoperative pain,
whereas its activation accelerates recovery from postoperative pain. Thus, we hypothesize that NR4A1 in
monocytes/macrophages is essential for pain resolution and limits chronic pain, and as a peripheral and
endogenous mechanism may offer a more effective and safer therapeutic target for the treatment of pain. We
have three specific aims to test this hypothesis. Specific Aim 1 will test whether NR4A1 in macrophages controls
the resolution of inflammation and postoperative pain induced by plantar incision in mice. Specific Aim2 will test
the hypothesis that natural and FDA-approved NR4A1 agonists promote pain resolution without major liabilities.
Specific Aim3 aims to test whether NR4A1 regulates the release of the secreted protein 1 (SPP1), a potential
biological and functional biomarker for NR4A1 target engagement and pain resolution. Successfully achieving
our specific aims is highly significant for the HEAL initiative because it will reveal new endogenous mechanisms
of pain resolution and provide a translational validation of NR4A1 as a new, non-addictive, therapeutic target for
two pain conditions at high risk of opioid abuse: postoperative pain and low back pain. Additionally, we will reveal
SPP1 as a novel biological and functional biomarker for future testing and improve of multiple NR4A1 agonists
aiming to prevent and treat chronic pain.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Research Career Enhancement in Implementation Science to Address Primary Prevention, Harm Reduction, and Evidence-Based Interventions for Opioid Use Disorder from the Emergency Department
Project Number: 1K02DA060357-01A1

Abstract:
PROJECT SUMMARY
The emergency department (ED) has emerged as a critical context from which to address the U.S. opioid
overdose crisis, which in 2021 alone accounted for over 80,000 deaths. This K02 Independent Scientist Award
will enhance my research career with implementation science approaches to address multiple domains of the
HHS Overdose Prevention Strategy from the emergency care setting. During this K02 award, I will augment my
existing clinical expertise in emergency medicine and addiction medicine and current research portfolio
spanning the continuum of opioid use and opioid use disorder with (1) new skills, knowledge, and training in
implementation science, (2) advanced proficiency in clinical trial design, and (3) specialized professional
development in team leadership and management. To accomplish these training objectives, I will leverage my
ongoing R01-funded single site randomized trial evaluating an embedded ED physical therapy intervention as
a non-opioid treatment modality for low back pain (R01HS027426, NCT04921449), which affects nearly 2 in 5
people and is the most common reason for acute and chronic opioid use. Specifically, I will (1) evaluate
implementation outcomes across multiple partners engaged in my ongoing R01 trial, (2) gather qualitative data
on contextual implementation determinants and preferred implementation strategies among current and future
research partners for use in a future multi-site hybrid effectiveness-implementation trial, and (3) conduct a
mixed-methods cost analysis of the embedded ED physical therapy care model to facilitate its scalability and
long-term sustainability. This K02 award comes at an opportune time in my early- to mid-career transition, as it
will provide me with a four-year period of intensive research focus to conduct these training and research
activities, which I could not otherwise accomplish given my current clinical obligations as an emergency
medicine physician. Following completion of this K02 award, I will apply the newly acquired implementation
science expertise to accelerate and catalyze the translation of my research agenda to real-world practice,
including primary prevention, harm reduction, and evidence-based interventions for opioid use disorder from
the ED setting.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: EVOLVE: Emulated trial of the VOice study for improving pain and reducing Long-term opioid use for VEterans
Project Number: 1I01HX003830-01

Abstract:
Background: Chronic pain is a major public health problem and a leading cause of disability among Veterans.
As such, addressing chronic pain and opioid safety remain top priorities of the Veterans Health Administration
(VHA). While long-term opioid therapy (LTOT) for chronic pain is common, harms of continuing LTOT may
outweigh benefits for many patients. When this is the case, guidelines recommend tapering or discontinuing
opioids; however, recent evidence also highlights the potential harms associated with tapering or discontinuing
opioids. Furthermore, guidelines emphasize the importance of optimizing non-pharmacologic pain treatment
(NPT) options, yet clinicians report several barriers to doing so. For these reasons, managing chronic pain
among patients prescribed LTOT is often challenging and there is a critical gap in evidence-based strategies to
overcome these challenges. To address this gap, the Veterans Pain Care Organizational Improvement
Comparative Effectiveness (VOICE) study compared two models of care to improve pain and support opioid
tapering. This 10-site pragmatic trial enrolling from 2017-2021 randomized 820 veterans with moderate to
severe pain treated with LTOT to two active collaborative care interventions with on average ten study contacts
over a 12-month period; VOICE did not have a control group or usual care condition. While both groups
improved, the VOICE study found no differences in pain-related outcomes or changes in opioid dose
between its two interventions. Thus, a lack of control condition leaves unanswered questions about the
impact of these interventions as compared to usual primary-care based VHA pain care.
Methods: To address these unanswered questions and help inform VA’s decisions about pain care resource
deployment, our overarching aim is to emulate a 3-arm, randomized controlled trial. Emulated trials draw on
observational data to emulate the design characteristics of a randomized trial when randomized trial data is not
available. In the proposed emulated trial, we will examine the impact of VOICE’s two active interventions
against a retrospectively matched “external” usual care control group using a propensity-based matching
approach. This control group will be drawn from the Evaluating Prescription Opioid Changes in Veterans
(EPOCH) study, a national longitudinal prospective cohort launched in 2016 and funded by VA Health Services
Research & Development (HSR&D) to understand effects of changes in opioid prescribing practices on
Veterans treated with LTOT for chronic pain. EPOCH’s large, nationally representative sample (N=9253),
nearly identical timeframe, inclusion criteria and study populations, and similar patient-reported and electronic
health record outcomes to VOICE make it a very compelling source of patients prescribed LTOT receiving
usual VHA pain care.
Specific Aims: By emulating a three-arm RCT and examining outcomes including pain-related interference,
opioid dose, quality of life, and engagement in non-pharmacological pain treatments, we will answer important
questions about implementation of treatments and approaches across VHA to enhance pain care. Thus, Aim 1
is to compare the collaborative care (active) interventions from the VOICE study to a matched usual care
control group drawn from the EPOCH cohort on the primary outcome of pain-related interference and
secondary outcomes of opioid dose reduction, NPT uptake and health-related quality of life. In Aim 2, we will
compare collaborative care (active) interventions from the VOICE study to a matched usual care control group
drawn from the EPOCH cohort on primary and secondary outcomes from Aim 1 among pre-specific high-risk
subgroups. Finally, in Aim 3, among those who tapered opioid dose, we will compare patient-reported rates of
harms (i.e., worsening pain and quality of life) in the collaborative care (active) interventions from the VOICE
study to a matched usual care control group drawn from the EPOCH cohort.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Behavior Change Components to Enhance Opioid Disposal After Surgery
Project Number: 1K23DA060310-01

Abstract:
PROJECT SUMMARY/ABSTRACT
This is an application for a K23 award for Dr. Lyen Huang, a surgeon and health services researcher at the
University of Utah. Dr. Huang is establishing himself as a young investigator in perioperative patient safety. His
current research focuses on reducing our healthcare system’s contributions to the opioid crisis. This K23 will
enable Dr. Huang to accomplish the following goals: (1) develop expertise in using patient-facing behavior
change components for promoting healthy behaviors, (2) develop expertise in implementation science to close
the gap more rapidly between research and health system interventions, (3) gain leadership and management
skills to support transdisciplinary, multi-institutional research and trials, and (4) transition to an independent
research career. To achieve these goals, Dr. Huang has assembled a mentoring team comprised of a primary
mentor, Dr. Kimberly Kaphingst, a leading researcher in health literacy, patient-provider communication, and
behavior change interventions; and a co-mentor, Dr. Alex Sox-Harris, a national expert in surgical and
addiction health services research and implementation science. Dr. Huang also has five advisors with
expertise in surgical leadership; perioperative, addiction medicine, and cancer health equity interventions;
pragmatic trials in rural communities; clinical trials; biostatistics; and survey methodology.
Although 42 million patients are prescribed opioids after surgery each year, we currently lack an effective and
scalable intervention for motivating patients to dispose of leftover opioids. Few patients dispose of their leftover
opioids, and existing interventions have shown mixed real-world results. Instead, patients insecurely store,
misuse, or share opioids putting themselves, families, and communities at risk. The objective of Dr. Huang’s
research is to develop and implement a theory- and evidence-based opioid disposal intervention. Dr. Huang
will (Aim 1) evaluate the feasibility and acceptability of behavior change components to enhance the University
of Utah’s current disposal intervention; (Aim 2) prepare for implementation and evaluation in different
populations and settings; and (Aim 3) test and refine the enhanced opioid disposal intervention. The expected
outcome will provide the evidence for multi-institutional trials of an intervention to promote safe opioid disposal
across the country. The proposed research is innovative in the application of behavior change and
implementation theories to the prevention of iatrogenic contributions to the opioid crisis and the use of an
ongoing system-wide opioid disposal intervention allowing for rapid, iterative refinement and evaluation.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: The Role of Parabrachial CGRP Neurons in Opioid Reinforcement
Project Number: 1F30DA060666-01

Abstract:
PROJECT SUMMARY
Opioid Use Disorder (OUD) is a chronic, relapsing disease that, despite our best efforts to understand and
mitigate the disease, has become a worsening public health crisis. 1,2 Currently, the medications to treat OUD
interact directly with opioid receptors. 3 While this helps patients decrease the use of more dangerous opioids,
the mechanism of action of the currently available drugs continues to perpetuate the substance abuse cycle.
Exploring novel non-opioid targets is necessary to overcome this current standstill. One specific alternative
population we are interested in investigating is calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) expressing neurons
within the parabrachial nucleus (CGRPPBN). These neurons have been well studied in itch and pain fields and
are known to project to the central amygdala (CeA) 4,5, a brain region directly implicated in processing the
negative emotional valence associated with alcohol and opioid withdrawal. The objective of this proposal is to
assess the functional role of CGRPPBN in opioid reinforcement and to determine the gene expression and
epigenetic changes associated with opioid taking and opioid withdrawal. Our preliminary results show that
CGRPPBN activity decreases during opioid taking and increases during opioid withdrawal. We have also found
that this population of neurons robustly expresses the µ-opioid receptor along with glutamatergic markers,
positioning this population as a potential direct activator of the CeA during opioid withdrawal. To further probe
these results, I will inhibit CGRPPBN neurons using molecular and pharmacological approaches and determine
the behavioral consequences of these interventions. One of the pharmacological approaches we will be testing
is an FDA-approved CGRP inhibitor currently used for migraine treatment. We will then establish the molecular
profile of these neurons using nuclear RNAseq and Cleavage Under Tagmentation (CUT&Tag) at baseline, as
well as during morphine taking and protracted abstinence. By integrating transcriptomic data with epigenetic
information on post-translational histone modifications, I will be able to build a comprehensive map of the active
and inactive chromatin regions with their corresponding differentially expressed genes, which can be used to
detect epigenetic targets critical to the identity of CGRPPBN neurons. The results of this study will allow us to
establish the feasibility of targeting these neurons to treat OUD via currently FDA-approved medications or
through novel epigenetic targets identified in this study. These results will broaden our understanding of
withdrawal and help expand our therapeutic arsenal for the long-term maintenance of opioid abstinence and
prevention of relapse.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Identification of Procedural, Genetic and Psychosocial Risk Factors for ChronicPost-Amputation Pain
Project Number: 1I01BX006104-01A1

Abstract:
Chronic Post-amputation Pain (cPAP) is a major unsolved healthcare problem. Every year, Veterans Health
Administration (VHA) hospitals perform 7,000 amputations and civilian hospitals perform approximately
115,000 amputations. Between 50 and 90% of Amputees will suffer from cPAP, with impaired psychological
well-being, physical disability, and a substantially lower quality of life in those patients affected, in addition to
the cost to society at large. Even novel surgical methods such as regenerative peripheral nerve interface
surgery can only modestly reduce, but not prevent, cPAP. Once cPAP has developed, treatment is very difficult
with few therapeutic options. Despite the high clinical relevance, there are still critical gaps in our knowledge of
cPAP and its pathophysiology. Our proposal is focused on addressing three of these gaps using the framework
of the Million Veteran Program (MVP).
The first Specific Aim is to describe the demographics of the MVP Amputee cohort, and the incidence of cPAP
in that cohort. This will be defined as point prevalence 9 (± 3) months after amputation. The complementary
outcome measures are the incidence and severity of cPAP over time, as well as 1- and 5-year mortality. This
will give us a solid understanding of the Amputee cohort within MVP. In addition, we will describe the
perioperative care these patients received around their amputation, and the access to care they had after
surgery, and whether these factors are associated with the development of cPAP. At completion of Specific Aim
1, we will have created a valuable MVP-specific phenotype for well-conducted genetic studies, which will also
facilitate studies by other researchers. We will have also assessed the patterns of practice, the access to care,
and the resulting time-course and severity of cPAP in MVP patients.
The second, and central, Specific Aim of this proposal is to identify genetic variants that are associated with
cPAP risk in MVP patients. This will serve three purposes: first, it will allow us to better understand the genetic
basis for individual risk to develop cPAP; second, it will allow us to describe the congruence of genetic risk
factors between cPAP and diagnoses which we know to influence pain conditions, in particular chronic non-
cPAP pain, anxiety, depression, PTSD, schizophrenia and substance use disorders; and third, this Aim will
shed light on biological-pathway based risk factors specific for cPAP, which may help identify therapeutic or
preventive candidate therapies going forward. At completion of Specific Aim 2, we will have characterized the
influence of genetic factors on the occurrence of cPAP while accounting for genetic risks of highly correlated
psychosocial risks.
The third Specific Aim of this proposal is to examine patient-specific health characteristics, including
psychosocial factors and Social Determinants of Health (SDOH). Despite strong evidence in other domains,
the relationship between psychosocial factors, SDOH, and the development of cPAP is currently unknown. At
completion of Specific Aim 3, we will have developed a holistic approach to the risk factors underlying cPAP by
assessing patient-specific and social determinants of health as they relate to the development of cPAP.
This proposal breaks ground for a future line of research aimed to inform a comprehensive risk score to assess
amputees’ risks of developing chronic pain. Data regarding the occurrence of PAP, the associated genetic
variants, the interventions that might have a beneficial effect on patient outcome, and the psychosocial and
demographic risk factors will offer new insights for assessment, interventions and improvement in meaningful
patient-centered outcomes after amputation surgery.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Assessing the Impact of Patient Factors on Therapeutic Capabilities of BMAC for Osteoarthritic Pain
Project Number: 1I21RX004888-01

Abstract:
Post-traumatic osteoarthritis (PTOA) is a debilitating condition of articular joints that is associated with pain, loss
of activity, and reduced quality of life. Non-battle musculoskeletal injuries in active Military members are higher
than civilian counterparts. Due in part to this increased risk of traumatic injury, and the occupational demands of
high-impact repetitive joint use, osteoarthritis incidence is almost three times higher in the military vs civilian
population by the age of 40. Current options (platelet-rich plasma, hyaluronic acid) for joint preservation are
being gradually replaced by autologous cell-based injections, including bone marrow aspirate concentrate
(BMAC), that aim to reduce intra-articular inflammation and relieve pain. Limitations for autologous sources of
BMAC expose these therapies to donor variation in product and efficacy. Age and PTOA can alter the cellular
composition and function of bone marrow, though how these changes may affect efficacy of BMAC injections for
PTOA pain relief remains unknown.
In this proposed project, we seek to devise a strategy to facilitate pain relief and joint preservation with BMAC
injections in a preclinical model of PTOA. Our central hypothesis posits that donor age, sex, and PTOA status
impact BMAC efficacy in relieving osteoarthritic pain and that personalized regimens of endurance exercise
could prime bone marrow to become a potent immunomodulatory product. We will address this objective with
two specific aims: 1) Determine the effect of patient factors (age, sex, PTOA) and exercise on BMAC composition
and immune-modulatory potential; 2) Evaluate the potential of individualized pre-habilitation to increase the pain-
relieving and joint-preserving capabilities of BMAC.
In the first aim, we will harvest and evaluate BMAC from 3 mo and 12 mo male and female Lewis rat populations
with and without induced PTOA. We will exercise a subset of rats daily. We will characterize the cellular
composition and immune-modulatory capabilities of the BMAC from all donors. We will then directly compare
BMAC quality from young vs. middle-aged, and osteoarthritic rats and evaluate whether exercise can rejuvenate
BMAC immune-modulatory potential. In the second aim, we will test the efficacy of these BMAC products in vivo
using a preclinical model of PTOA. We will assess longitudinal pain and function, as well as end-stage
inflammation and tissue health. We will then link the compositional and functional changes of BMAC due to age,
sex, PTOA, and exercise to in vivo pain relief. Findings from the successful completion of these aims will be well
positioned for expedited clinical translation to establish guidelines for quality control of BMAC and to encourage
clinicians to implement pre-habilitative interventions.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: The role of expectation in the pain-trauma co-morbidity among Veterans
Project Number: 2I01CX000816-05A2

Abstract:
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) is highly co-morbid with chronic pain conditions. Pain contributes to
more severe PTSD (and vice versa) as evidenced by greater disability, more frequent use of harmful opioid
analgesics and increased pain severity. Biomechanisms underlying the entanglement of pain and trauma in
Veterans are incompletely understood. This is a renewal application (CSR&D Merit Review CX000816) to
continue deciphering the neural networks underlying pain and PTSD co-morbidity in Veterans. The long-term
goal is to determine biological markers of heterogeneity within pain-trauma co-morbidity in order to improve
symptom prevention and treatments. Understanding unique and overlapping impact of pain and/or trauma
symptoms on the underlying neurocircuitry has the potential to optimize existing and pave way to developing
new, biologically targeted interventions. The objective of this renewal is to build upon our prior findings and
identify the role of expectation in pain-trauma comorbidity in diagnostically heterogeneous Veterans with
combat trauma and chronic pain. Our current hypotheses are based on our published and strong preliminary
data. We propose to test the “two-component” expectation or anticipation model whereby neural systems
underlying anticipation of pain onset (broken in traumatic stress) and pain offset (broken in chronic pain)
interact to create biomechanistic vulnerability for pain-trauma comorbidity. We will examine the integrity (i.e.,
connectivity) and capability (i.e., function) of neural networks underlying pain and pain relief anticipation in
diagnostically heterogeneous cohort of Veterans. We will employ advanced neuroimaging (rest and task-based
functional MRI) and advanced statistical approaches to uncover multivariable anticipatory biophenotypes within
Veterans with comorbid pain and trauma. Aim1: To determine the degree to which traumatic stress affects the
capability and integrity of pain anticipation Hypothesis 1a: Traumatic stress will be associated with abnormal
pain anticipation response within insula and amygdala during task-based fMRI; Hypothesis 1b: Traumatic
stress will disrupt fronto-amygdala-insular connectivity at rest. Aim2: To determine the degree to which chronic
pain affects the capability and integrity of relief anticipation. Hypothesis 2a: Chronic pain will be associated with
abnormal pain relief anticipation within insula and cingulate during task-based fMRI; Hypothesis 2b: Chronic
pain will disrupt fronto-striatal-insula connectivity at rest. Exploratory Aim3: Build robust biophenotypes based
on subgrouping anticipatory mechanisms. We will utilize clustering approaches including, but not limited to,
graph-based models. The best model will be determined through analysis of training, test, and validation
samples. Hypothesis 3: We will be able to separate pain anticipation vs. relief anticipation biophenotypes in
diagnostically heterogeneous Veterans with combat trauma and chronic pain. This work will lead to
personalized interventions for our Veterans that are based on their biological profiles. For example, selecting
CBT-based interventions for those with anxiety-avoidance/escape biomechanism vs. interoception-based
interventions for those with relief-related helplessness biomechanism.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: The impact of prolonged fentanyl exposure after mild traumatic brain injury on stress associated behaviors
Project Number: 1I21RX005149-01

Abstract:
Veterans who have experienced repeated blast exposures can develop a range of long-term consequences of
mild traumatic brain injuries (mTBI). Their injuries also increase the likelihood of prolonged opioid use due to
pain related to the injuries and resulting treatment with opioids. The long-term consequences of mTBI include
an increased risk for developing PTSD and substance use disorders (SUDs), and this risk is likely
compounded by prolonged opioid exposure. Individual genetic and life experience factors can also contribute
to the risk of developing PTSD and SUDs. For example, the FKBP5 gene has sequence variants in the
population that alter the risk for developing PTSD and SUDs. It encodes the protein FKBP51, which regulates
glucocorticoid receptor sensitivity. This study will investigate the additive effects of mTBI and prolonged opioid
exposure while asking whether inhibiting FKBP51 can ameliorate the long-term risks of mTBI and opioids.
We propose to use male and female mice in a fully parametric design to test whether mTBI and prolonged
opioid exposure exacerbate the risk for anxiety-like and drug seeking behaviors later and to test a possible
therapeutic solution. Mice will be exposed to overpressure blast in a well-defined protocol that is routinely used
at our facility followed by prolonged (four week) and continuous treatment with fentanyl. Four weeks later, we
will test the animals for the development of anxiety behaviors and their vulnerability to take fentanyl using a
novel oral self-administration procedure. We predict that animals that received both blast and prolonged
opioids will have worsened anxiety-like and fentanyl seeking behaviors afterwards. We will then test whether
SAFit2, a potent and selective FKBP51 small molecule antagonist, can mitigate these outcomes. Our goal will
be to translate these preliminary experiments into a Merit Award to test these ideas more fully in hopes of
developing an innovative new treatment for these long term stress-associated and substance use problems.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Nutrition-based interventions to ameliorate pain in sickle cell disease
Project Number: 1K99AT012494-01A1

Abstract:
PROJECT SUMMARY/ABSTRACT
Integrative approaches, including nutrition, to address pain suffer from a paucity of mechanistic understanding,
which often disproportionately impacts vulnerable populations. Affective modulation of pain in chronic disease
remains an unmet need, however personalized, accessible approaches utilizing diet may provide alternative
approaches for difficult-to-treat pain. Sickle cell disease (SCD) is the most commonly inherited blood disorder,
primarily afflicting individuals of African and Latin American descent in the United States. Pain is a major
comorbidity of SCD that can start during infancy and persist throughout life. Affective modulation in SCD is
associated with social stigma, discrimination, limited resources, poor nutrition, and social isolation. Experience
of pain is an outcome of somatosensory nociceptive inputs, as well as affective and cognitive state. These factors
may contribute to pain by attenuating the brain’s top-down spinothalamic descending inhibitory pain pathway
(DIPP) and may even interfere with response to therapy. Currently, high dose opioids are used for sickle pain.
We discovered that nutrition-based approaches using nutrient- and ω-3 fatty acid-enriched “sickle diet” (SD) to
target chronic pain ameliorate chronic sensory hypersensitivity and enhance spinothalamic pain inhibition.
Dietary manipulation is a potent modulator of endogenous cannabinoids, such as anandamide (AEA), which has
potent analgesic properties in the DIPP via dopamine (DA). DA plays a key role in the DIPP by signaling via
brain regions that directly inhibit ascending pain signals in the spinal cord dorsal horn. We hypothesize that
nutritionally enriched sickle diet as an early-life intervention will stimulate dopaminergic activity and
ameliorate hyperalgesia in sickle mice with multigenerational benefits. In this MOSAIC K99/R00 (PAR-21-
271-010) I propose to evaluate dietary intervention as an integrative approach to address the issue of resource
and nutrient limitation as factors contributing to pain in SCD. I propose the evaluation of translational endpoints
as follows: K99-SA#1. Year 1-2. Use PET neuroimaging and spatial transcriptomics to evaluate the effect of SD-
intervention on functional AEA and DA activity in the brain and sensory hypersensitivity of sickle mice. Milestone
1. Stratify cell type distribution in SCD DIPP with nutritional enrichment intervention. R00-SA#2. Year 3-5.
Determine effects of dietary enrichment on offspring DIPP function and gene expression. Milestone 2. Establish
mouse breeding colony to continue independent studies and apply techniques from K99 phase. R00-SA#3. Year
3-5 Determine teratogenicity of perinatal cannabinoid exposure in SCD offspring mice. Milestone 3. Determine
associations between cannabinoid exposure and adverse outcomes and establish collaboration for epigenomic
evaluation. These findings will inform the development of nutrition-based clinical approaches and will form the
basis for R01 grant applications to study dietary roles in SCD pain as prospective clinical study. Deliverables.
Identification of SD as a potentially effective therapy for chronic pain in SCD and evaluation of the
multigenerational effects of cannabinoid exposure.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Probiotic neuroimmune modulation of morphine tolerance
Project Number: 1R15DA058187-01A1

Abstract:
The vast majority of adults in the US have taken an opioid drug for pain relief. Oral opioids have revolutionized
our ability to treat post-surgical pain and, thereby, drastically shortened post-surgical hospital stays. However,
recently there has been an unprecedented increase in the number of patients taking oral opioids for pain who
have developed an opioid use disorder (OUD). In fact, more than 280 people per day died of an opioid overdose
in 2021(1). While the dramatic increase in OUD has coincided with the much-reported increase in opioid
prescriptions, it is still true that only a fraction of patients who are prescribed opioids for pain develop an OUD.
If we could identify those pain patients most at risk prior to opioid treatment, we could potentially stem the tide
of opioid abuse and overdose death. Recent studies have shown that alterations in the gut microbiome can
influence a plethora of central nervous systems disorders, leading to widespread acceptance of the concept of
a gut-microbiome-brain axis(2, 3) . It is compelling that, coincident with the increase in opioid prescriptions, there
has also been a large increase in the routine and often unnecessary use of oral antibiotics—a trend that that has
altered the gut microbiome of an entire generation. Not surprisingly, given the widespread expression of opioid
receptors in the gut, opioids have been shown to alter the gut microbiome. Furthermore, alterations in the
microbiome have been shown to alter opioid analgesia and reward, suggesting that opioids influence the gut-
brain axis(4-8). However, to date, no studies have examined whether the gut microbiome influences the
development of OUDs. In our preliminary studies, we capitalized on both behavioral variability in a mouse model
of antinociceptive tolerance and OUD, and mouse microbiome variability, both innate and in response to
morphine, to identify microbial biomarkers of OUD. One such biomarker we identified is Akkermansia muciniphila
(AKK), a key gut commensal of mammals that promotes gut homeostasis and has emerged as an important
biological intervention in diseases with diverse etiologies. Specifically, we found a significantly higher abundance
of Akkermansia muciniphila (AKK) in mice that did not develop antinociceptive tolerance to morphine during
voluntary chronic oral morphine use. This discovery led to our central hypothesis, to be tested here, that AKK
protects against the development of OUDs. Here we will interrogate the molecular mechanisms by which AKK
protects against OUD (Aim 1) and assess how AKK supplementation impacts dynamics of microbiome
community interactions and final composition in a morphine-exposed gut (Aim 2). Together these studies could
inform development of immediate and non-invasive therapeutic strategies to extend the analgesic efficacy of
opioids for chronic pain conditions while reducing the development of OUD.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Studying synaptic transmission under opioid exposure using hiPSC-derived midbrain model and hyperspectral fluorescence lifetime imaging
Project Number: 5R21DA060543-02

Abstract:
Project Summary
There is an urgent need to address the current public health crisis of opioid abuse and overdose deaths through
development of effective treatments for opioid use disorder (OUD) and non-addictive therapeutics to manage
pain. Ultimately, achievement of these goals would be greatly facilitated by the existence of novel ex-vivo models
that recapitulate key features of neurobiology underlying the addictive process using human cells and advanced
imaging systems that can monitor the interactions between multiple neurotransmitter actions driving opioid
responses and reward pathways. This proposal aims to develop new technologies to create such ex-vivo models
and imaging systems, aiming at probing dynamic behaviors within the models at high spatial and temporal
resolution. Aim 1 will focus on recapitulating neuronal pathways in the ventral tegmental area (VTA) and nucleus
acccumbens core (NAc), which have long been recognized to form the basis of substance abuse disorders.
Specifically, we propose an additive manufacturing approach based on 3D bioprinting of human induced
pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) to establish 3D cultures within brain-mimetic scaffolds. Moreover, use of an
innovative, self-healing biomaterial as a printing medium and 3D culture scaffold enables “stitching” of unique
neuronal tissues constructs into integrated, yet regionally defined, complex networks. For example, we propose
to integrate tissue modules representing the GABAergic/dopaminergic circuitry of the VTA with tissue modules
representing the GABAergic medium spiny neurons on the NAc. In addition, these tissue-engineered networks
are optically transparent and easy to image, making them great models to study neural networks driving opioid
responses and reward pathways. In Aim 2, we will separately develop a TIRF (Total Internal Reflection
Fluorescence) microscopy technique to probe agonist-dependent dimerization of MOR (human µ-opioid
receptor) at the single-molecule level and a hyperspectral and lifetime imaging system to monitor the dynamics
of dopamine, GABA, glutamate and Ca2+ simultaneously. Together, these new imaging methods will enable
dynamic monitoring of the effects of opioids, and other small-molecule therapeutics, on the neuronal circuitry
underlying addictive processes. Overall, we expect these technological innovations to provide crucial tools for
development of new therapeutics which can effectively combat the opioid crisis.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: FABP5: Novel Functions in Pain Modulation
Project Number: 5R01NS137595-02

Abstract:
Project Summary
Chronic pain is widespread in the adult population and inadequate pain control has a major negative impact on
the quality of life of chronic pain sufferers. Many currently available analgesics display modest efficacy and in
the case of opioids, addiction liability that has resulted in a dramatic increase in opioid abuse and addiction.
Consequently, there is an urgent need to identify novel targets for the development of non-opioid analgesics to
treat chronic pain. Our group has previously identified fatty acid binding protein 5 (FABP5) as an intracellular
carrier for endocannabinoids and structurally related N-acylethanolamines, whose inhibition augments tissue
levels of both lipid classes and produces analgesia. In the periphery, FABP5 inhibition additionally blunts the
release of pro-inflammatory and proalgesic mediators, positioning FABP5 as a promising target for the
development of analgesics. Accordingly, recently developed FABP5 inhibitors display efficacy in a range of pain
models and are rapidly advancing across the preclinical pipeline, with clinical testing scheduled to begin within
several years. Despite the therapeutic potential of FABP5 inhibition in treating pain, our understanding of its
mechanisms of action remains limited. While the majority of FABP5's effects originate from the modulation of
intracellular lipid transport and receptor activation, emerging evidence indicates that subsets of FABPs can be
released from distinct cell populations under specific conditions to exert unique biological functions. In this
application we test the novel hypothesis that inflammation triggers FABP5 secretion, which is instrumental in
delivering proalgesic lipids to nociceptive sensory neurons to maintain hyperalgesia. Conversely, sequestration
of extracellular FABP5 produces antinociceptive effects. Mechanistically, we hypothesize that FABP5 binds to
and delivers a lipid of the leukotriene family to its receptor, in turn sensitizing the nociceptive channels transient
receptor potential ankyrin 1 (TRPA1) and transient receptor potential vanilloid 1 (TRPV1) to sustain pain. Specific
Aim 1 tests the hypothesis that extracellular FABP5 modulates inflammatory pain hypersensitivity and will
interrogate the mechanisms underlying its cellular secretion. Specific Aim 2 tests the hypothesis that inhibition
of extracellular FABP5 or leukotriene signaling blunts inflammatory TRPA1 and TRPV1 sensitization. Specific
Aim 3 seeks to characterize the mechanisms underlying leukotriene-mediated TRPA1 sensitization. Successful
completion of the outlined aims will establish a novel paradigm linking extracellular FABP5 to pain modulation
and will provide a foundation for the development of analgesics targeting FABP5.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Real-world momentary assessment of kratom use and laboratory-based observed cessation accompanied by product assays: Toward an interdisciplinary characterization of kratom use and pharmacology
Project Number: 5R00DA055571-03

Abstract:
Project Summary/Abstract
Mitragyna speciosa (kratom) is a plant indigenous to Southeast Asia with over 40 bioactive alkaloids, two of
which, mitragynine (MG) and 7-hydroxymitragynine (HMG), act at mu opioid receptors (MORs). Use of kratom
and kratom products increased in the US contemporaneous a critical change-point in the opioid crisis (when
painkiller prescribing became more conservative), with many US adults initiating kratom use for putatively
therapeutic indications, such as mitigation of withdrawal from prescribed or nonprescribed opioids, and as a
self-treatment for symptoms of pain, fatigue, or psychiatric or substance use disorders (SUDs). The number of
US users in the past few years is likely >10 million—and increasing. Yet we have little understanding of the
balance of, or determinants of, beneficial or adverse effects of kratom either proximal to use (e.g., sedation,
nausea, analgesia) or over time (e.g., symptoms of SUD). Preclinical work shows that MG and HMG act as
partial biased at MORs but also have non-opioid mechanisms of action and that these and other alkaloids may
have therapeutic potential for the treatment of pain and SUDs with less risk than traditional opioids. This
converges with self-report data, where there is remarkably consistent therapeutic benefit attributed to kratom
with minor-moderate side effects and fewer indicators of abuse potential than might be expected from a
substance that, for some, reportedly substitutes for opioids. Yet this work is limited to cross-sectional surveys,
case reports, and social-media analyses, which may suffer from self-selection and recall bias and sheer lack of
information. Many large surveys of regular users are outdated, given rapid expansion of kratom products, and
diverge from findings in smaller samples, particularly with respect to prevalence of kratom addiction and
withdrawal. Given kratom’s complex pharmacology and novelty (in the US), and the accompanying near-
vacuum in policy and in clinical recommendations, more work is needed to understand its risks and potential
benefits. So, too, is scientific consilience in developing a systematic line of kratom research. The aims of this
K99/R00 work towards both. For the K99, we aim to, using a sample of kratom-using US adults: (1) conduct
momentary assessment of individual instances of kratom product use in daily life; (2) determine associations of
momentary responses with directly assayed content of samples of participants’ kratom products; (3) evaluate
relationships among kratom effects (including withdrawal-like effects), the kratom products used, and alkaloid
concentrations in biospecimens; (4) explore narrative accounts of kratom use. For the R00, I will (5)
systematically evaluate effects of kratom discontinuation. Collectively, these studies will be a bridge to
randomized interventional studies to be proposed in an R01. These studies also begin the interdisciplinary and
interinstitutional collaboration I believe is needed in kratom research, reflected by the diversity of knowledge
and expertise of my K99 mentors and collaborators who will ensure that my enhanced training places me on
the strongest foundation for developing into one of the top leaders in the field of human kratom research.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Investigating Novel Interventions for Low Back Pain in US Military Veterans: A Randomized Controlled Adaptive Phase II Trial
Project Number: 5I01CX002667-02

Abstract:
Background: There is currently a severe dearth of safe, non-habit forming pharmacological interventions for
chronic pain disorders, and the clinical need to develop efficacious new therapeutics has never been more
urgent. Fueled by the worsening opioid crisis and further exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic, opioid and
other drug overdose deaths have climbed to staggeringly high levels. The rapid development of
pharmacological agents for the management of chronic pain conditions that are safe, well-tolerated, efficacious
and non-addicting is thus of paramount importance. Neurosteroids are naturally occurring molecules that are
enriched in human brain and potentially ideal candidates for the safe and effective treatment of pain. The
proposed project is a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled adaptive design study to determine the
safety and efficacy of two promising neurosteroid molecules for the treatment of chronic low back pain in
Veterans. The project logically builds upon the findings from our prior randomized clinical trial (RCT)
demonstrating that the highest dose of pregnenolone (500mg/day) significantly improves chronic low back pain
(Naylor et al., 2020), while also suggesting that higher doses of this molecule a may be even more efficacious.
A second neurosteroid molecule, dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) has also been implicated in the
pathophysiology of pain. DHEA levels are inversely associated with pain and our preliminary data demonstrate
that 8-weeks of DHEA treatment is well-tolerated and reduces pain symptoms. Our strong biomarker and
clinical data suggest that both pregnenolone and DHEA appear to have great therapeutic potential for the
treatment of chronic pain conditions. We will thus investigate if these molecules exhibit possible efficacy in low
back pain and determine maximally well-tolerated doses that are safe and optimally efficacious in the proposed
three-arm trial (pregnenolone, DHEA, placebo).
Methods: The proposed project is a Phase II randomized clinical trial utilizing an adaptive design to determine
the safety and efficacy of pregnenolone and DHEA for the treatment of chronic low back pain in Veterans.
Participants will be randomized in a 1:1:1 ratio to 4 weeks of treatment with pregnenolone, DHEA or matching
placebo (N=108, approximately 36 per group). Pregnenolone dosing will begin at 500mg/day and escalate
every week by 500mg as tolerated (to a potential maximum dose 2000mg/day). DHEA dosing will begin at
100mg/day and increase weekly by 100mg/day (to a potential maximum dose 400mg/day). The primary
endpoint will be post-treatment change scores in mean daily pain intensity ratings (numerical rating scale, 0-
10). Secondary endpoint will be changes in pain interference measures (Brief Pain Inventory). Safety will be
thoroughly monitored throughout study participation (SAEs, AEs, clinical laboratory parameters, vital signs,
ECG). Neurosteroid quantifications will be conducted by highly sensitive state-of-the-art and specific mass
spectrometry to investigate baseline and post-treatment neurosteroid levels as biomarker predictors of
therapeutic response, and to determine optimal therapeutic ranges for these neurosteroid interventions.
Conclusion: Chronic pain symptoms profoundly influence quality of life and function in a very large number of
Veterans, and efficacious new treatments that are safe, well-tolerated, and non-habit forming are urgently
needed. Compelling preclinical and clinical data support the possibility that neurosteroids such as
pregnenolone and DHEA may be extremely promising treatments for pain conditions. The proposed RCT
would thus provide pivotal evidence to optimize neurosteroid dosing in pain disorders and could rapidly
translated into Phase 3 clinical trials. Findings from the proposed clinical trial efforts could thus lead to a
potential therapeutic breakthrough for chronic pain conditions.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: Development of Glycosylated Endomorphin Analogs with Low Abuse Liability for Treatment of Pain.
Project Number: 5I01BX006167-02

Abstract:
Project Summary/Abstract
 Opioids acting at the mu opioid receptor (MOR) remain the gold standard for treatment of
moderate to severe pain relief, but their use is limited by serious side effects, particularly abuse
liability. The opioid epidemic has grown steadily in the past three decades, resulting in 137
deaths per day. In this program, we will test modifications of the core pharmacophore of an
endomorphin analog that has been shown to provide pain relief comparable to morphine while
exhibiting reduction of several side effects, including abuse liability. A series of glycosylated
analogs of endomorphin, designed to enhance blood-brain-barrier penetration, will be tested.
Preliminary tests indicate highly effective acute antinociception/pain relief for 2 of these
compounds. We will identify 3 candidate compounds and assess them for low abuse liability in
rodent models that correlate with human abuse liability. We will then test for reduction of
tolerance and respiratory depression relative to currently used opioids, and effective relief of 3
forms of pain ranging from moderate to chronic duration. Pharmacokinetic profiles will enable
planning of human studies. The goal of this project is to show proof-of-concept that these novel
endomorphin analogs can provide effective treatment of pain without rewarding properties and
other key adverse effects. Successful outcomes of this project will support development of these
compounds for clinical use as novel treatments for pain and potentially for opioid use disorder.

